Wednesday, August 8, 1990
Almanac and Headline News
Almanac for August 8 not available.
---------
Headlines
   ---
   Iraq's president says his country will-  in his words-  ``confront
any imperialist, Zionist attack'' against Iraqi occupation forces in
Kuwait. The United States is mounting a huge military presence in the
Gulf region.
   ---
   A meeting in Bonn today failed to produce an agreement between West
German Chancellor Kohl and opposition leaders on holding earlier
all-German elections. Kohl was trying to convince the politicians to
hold voting in October instead of December.
   ---
   Religious and human rights leaders in South Africa are joining with
the African National Congress in calling for the government to rein in
its security forces. The leaders say failure to do so will threaten a
break-through in peace talks.
   ---
   Health Secretary Louis Sullivan says he accepted an apology from
California Representative Fortney ``Pete'' Stark and he considers the
matter between them closed. Stark sent a letter apologizing for saying
Sullivan was a disgrace to the black race.

---------
Arafat heads guest list at Kreisky funeral
By JOBY WARRICK

   VIENNA (UPI) - Former Chancellor Bruno Kreisky was eulogized
Tuesday as one of Austria's greatest and longest-serving leaders of the
20th century at a state funeral attended by PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat
and more than 150 other foreign VIPs.
   Prime ministers or foreign ministers from 10 European states were
among the dignitaries who marched behind Kreisky's flag-draped coffin in
the one of the grandest funeral processions in postwar Austrian history.
   Tens of thousands of Austrians stood in a steady drizzle to view
the solemn procession as it wound along Vienna's famous Ringstrasse from
the parliament building to the grounds of the Imperial Palace, seat of
the old Hapsburg empire.
   Kreisky, who died July 29 at age 79, was to be buried later in the
day at the Central Cemetery, where many of the nation's most famous
politicians, musicians and artists are buried.
   ``We mourn today the loss of a great man,'' Austrian Chancellor
Franz Vranitzky said in an eulogy. ``But we do not just mourn, but we
reflect, and we derive new strength ... to meet new tasks and
challenges.''
   The number and caliber of the foreign guests attending the funeral
were seen as a measure of Kreisky's impact during a quarter-century as a
member of the Austrian government, including 13 years as chancellor.

				    -1-

   Besides being one of the principle architects of Austria's
permanent neutrality, Kreisky rose to international prominence as one of
the first Western European leaders to openly advocate Palestinian2
self-determination and to try to break down barriers between Eastern and
Western Europe.
   In 1979 he became the first Western head of government to host
Arafat, the leader of Palestine Liberation Organization, in an official
state visit. Arafat returned the compliment by attending Kreisky's
funeral, conspicuous among the dark-clad mourners in his trademark
headdress and military uniform.
   Among the other foreign VIPs were prime ministers Felipe Gonzales
of Spair, Ingvar Carlsson of Sweden, Marian Calfa of Czechoslovkia,
Petre Roman of Romania and Hans Brunhart of Liechtenstein, as well as
foreign ministers Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany, Marcus Meckel
of East Germany, Gianni De Michelis of Italy, Roland Dumas of France and
Pertti Paasio of Finland.
   President Bush sent U.S. Ambassador to West Germany Vernon Walters
to the funeral as his personal emissary. Representing the Soviet Union
was Georgi Arabtov, a close advisor to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
   Among the speakers at Kreisky's funeral was Dumas, who lamented the
absence of Kreisky's ``brave voice'' from the world's political stage.
   As chancellor of Austria from 1970 to 1983, Kreisky was one of
post-war Europe's leading Social Democrats and was immensely popular at
home, where his political longevity and leadership style earned him the
nickname ``Kaiser Bruno.''
   Born to upper middle-class Jewish parents, Kreisky joined Austria's
underground Socialist movement in the 1930s and fled to Sweden when his
country was annexed to Nazi Germany in 1938.
   He returned to occupied Austria after the war, and as a Foreign
Ministry undersecretary helped negotiate the 1955 treaty that won
Austria its independence and established its permanent neutrality.
   As foreign minister from 1959 to 1966, he adopted a pragmatic
approach to the realities of Cold War-era Europe, becoming the first
Western foreign minister to visit Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary.
   His ties with Arafat and Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi drew
criticism from other Western leaders, but enabled him to serve as
mediator in Middle East conflicts.

------

Leaky oil blockade against Iraq will fail
By LEE STOKES

   CAIRO, Egypt (UPI) - The industrialized nations' strategy to bring
Baghdad to its knees by blacklisting Iraqi oil will entail a tricky
switch to alternative supplies, and can only work if the boycott is long
term and total, analysts said.
   Experts say the West's strategy has the potential to cripple Iraq's
oil-based economy, and compel Iraqi President Saddam Hussein to withdraw
from Kuwait.
   But they say a long-term embargo which denies Iraq a market for its

				    -2-

oil will be more effective, but also more difficult to sustain, than
trying to interdict overland pipelines through Saudia Arabia and Turkey
or using a naval blockade to stop any shipments through the Persian
Gulf.
   ``(Saddam) foresaw an international blockade ... but he felt he
could survive because the West needs Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude,'' one
Middle East diplomat said. ``Iraq is hoping it can always sell its crude
on the black market if sanctions are imposed.''
   Key consumers such as the United States, France, West Germany and
Japan have already put short-term economic interests aside to punish
Saddam, refusing to buy Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil and accepting the
inevitable rise in the price of the crucial commodity.
   More than 70 percent of the two nations' output was destined for
Japan, the United States and the European Community.
   Iraq acknowledged Monday that demand for its oil has fallen, and
closed one of two pipelines passing through Turkish territory to the
Mediterranean, reducing the flow in the second by 30 percent.
   Experts believe the move was a tactical bluff aimed at showing it
can survive the blockade now being put into place.
   A total boycott of Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil (now controled by Iraq)
could cut world supplies by 4.64 million barrels a day - about 10
percent of the world's traded crude. But several other OPEC member
states have spare production capacities and could cover the difference.
   The West's thirst for the vital crude must be satisfied either by
major producers like Saudi Arabia and Venezuela increasing production,
or by using strategic oil reserves.
   ``Even if Turkey and Saudi Arabia refuse to shut down their oil
pipelines, an international blockade could still be effective,'' said
David Butter, editor of the London-based Middle East Economic Digest.
   Monday's edition of the Cyprus-based oil industry newsletter,
Middle East Economic Survey, said OPEC members would have to break
current cartel quota levels if the shortfall caused by Iraq and Kuwait
was to be compensated for.
   ``Here the key obviously lies with Saudi Arabia,'' the newsletter
said. ``But there must be considerable doubt as to how far the kingdom
would be prepared to go in antagonizing Iraq.''
   Oil industry sources in the Gulf state of Bahrain said Turkey and
Saudi Arabia would pay a price if they forbid Iraqi shipments.
   Turkey receives 60 percent of its own oil and $250 million per year
in transit fees from Iraq.
   Even more ominous, the sources believed Saudi interference in the
oil flow would be viewed by Baghdad as a declaration of war.
   The wild card is whether key consumer nations, having overridden
short-term economic interests, can sustain the strategy long-term.
   ``Key importers such as Japan have decided that if this situation
continues, then the long-term future of the world economy will be in
danger ... so they have decided that quick, firm action now is the best
way to curb the effect on the world economy,'' one oil industry source
said.
   Former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger told NBC-TV that an
effective blockade would compel Baghdad to end its venture in Kuwait.

				    -3-

   ``If no oil is being bought from Iraq and Kuwait and if the
economic blockade is made effective for several months, I think that
then Iraq will have to withdraw,'' Kissinger said on Sunday.
   But many experts believe there may be a weakening of resolve if
increased oil prices spur inflation in various nations and create
consumer discontent. Then, many governments may abandon their principles
and purchase oil on the black market from the pariah regimes.
   The unanimity of the blockade is virtually unprecedented.
   Unlike U.S. sanctions on Iran during the 8-year-long Persian Gulf
war, other key oil importers such as Japan and the European Community
kept importing Iranian crude, allowing Tehran to bankroll the bloodshed.
   U.S. imports of Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude during the first five
months of this year averaged 609,000 and 116,000 barrels a day,
respectively, equivalent to 10 percent and 2 percent of total U.S. crude
imports.
   Iran said Monday turbulance in the world oil market caused by the
Iraq-Kuwait crisis was temporary and asked OPEC member-states to stick
to their production quotas, the official Islamic Republic News Agency
reported.
   Iranian Oil Minister Gholamreza Aqazadeh told reporters in Tehran
the industrialized states would fall back on their oil reserves during
the crisis to tide over shortages in the market caused by a possible
halt or slow-down in Iraqi and Kuwaiti exports.
   Aqazadeh said the OPEC agreement does not allow any member state to
make up for shortages in production of another member state.
   The Iranian oil minister predicted that oil prices would continue
to rise for a while on the world market, but he ``was not sure how long
it would continue,'' He asked OPEC member-states therefore to ``preserve
their self-control.''
   Regional analysts said Aqazadeh had an ax to grind in asking other
OPEC member states not to produce more. Iran stands to make considerable
revenue gains from price rises.

------

Benazir Bhutto: First woman prime minister of an Islamic country
By United Press International

   Benazir Bhutto, 37, became Pakistan's prime minister in December of
1988 following the suspicious death of her longtime foe Gen. Mohammed
Zia ul-Haq, who had seized power from Bhutto's father in 1977 and had
him executed.
   Benazir Bhutto, a Radcliffe educated exile, had returned to
Pakistan in 1986, vowing to avenge her father's death and restore
democracy to her country. She was greeted by hundreds of thousands of
followers, but few observers believed the young woman would be taken
seriously in the conservative Islamic nation of 100 million.
   But Bhutto realized her dreams when Zia was killed in the
suspicious explosion and crash of his military plane on Aug. 17, 1988.
Bhutto, pregnant with her first child, campaigned in elections Zia had
called before his death.

				    -4-

   She portrayed her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, as a martyr and many
of her countrymen saw her as her father's political heir.
   Shortly after returning to Pakistan in 1986, Benazir Bhutto told a
rally: ``Seeing you, the people, makes me feel that he is alive before
my eyes. He (her father) told me in our last meeting that I must
sacrifice everything for my country. This is my mission.''
   The people agreed, electing her Pakistan People's Party into power
and making Bhutto the first woman prime minister of an Islamic country.
Earlier this year, she became the first head of state in modern times to
give birth when she had her second child, a daughter.
   Some feminists complained Bhutto moved too slowly in changing
Pakistan's laws that discriminate against women, but Bhutto, who wears a
veil in public, argued that she wanted steady change for her nation,
where tradition is a force to be reckoned with.
   She attempted to strengthen Pakistan's alliances with other Islamic
nations, traveling throughout the Middle East to meet with leaders
unaccustomed to dealing with women in power.
   Bhutto also grappled with escalating tensions between Pakistan and
neighboring India over Kashmir, a mostly-Islamic region fighting for
independence from predominately Hindu India.
   Born June 21, 1953, into a wealthy, landowning family in Sind
Province, Bhutto was noted for her outspoken manner and independent will
- unusual qualities for a woman in conservative Islamic Pakistan.
   The eldest of four children, she was particularly favored by her
Western-educated father, who became Pakistan's leader in 1971. Even as a
young girl, ``Pinky,'' as she was known to family and friends, took a
keen interest in politics.
   Some believed her father trained her as his successor. In 1972,
Bhutto took Benazir to India for a meeting with Prime Minister Indira
Gandhi.
   ``I live and breathe politics from the moment I get up through to
the night,'' she once said.
   At 16, Bhutto was accepted by Radcliffe college in Massachusetts
where she spent four years and developed her talent for oratory. She
later crossed the Atlantic to polish her education at Britain's Oxford
University, where she studied politics.
   Sophisticated and outgoing, Bhutto enjoyed popular music and
hamburgers and became the focus of attention among Oxford's smart set.
That changed after her Zia seized power from her father, who was hung in
1979.
   ``After the coup d'etat, I was pulled into the political arena,''
Bhutto said. ``I felt that it was a struggle for life and death - first
for my father and then for his cause.''
   Zia quickly moved to suppress her struggle, keeping Bhutto and her
mother, Nusrat, in jail or under house arrest and harassing them with
legal actions.
   Bhutto distanced herself from her Oxford-educated brothers,
Shahnawaz and Murtaza, who moved to neighboring Afghanistan and founded
an extremist anti-Zia group.
   Benazir Bhutto and her mother were allowed to leave Pakistan for
England in 1984, where they lived in self imposed exile.

				    -5-

   ``They thought I would come to my senses, enjoy myself, forget
politics,'' Bhutto said.
   Instead Bhutto took over leadership of the Pakistan People's Party
from her ailing mother and devoted much time to settling differences
between party officials.
   To test Pakistan's new political freedom, Bhutto returned in April
1986 and began an exhausting series of rallies to press for fresh
parliamentary elections and Zia's resignation.
   Political rivals accused her of showing the same autocratic
tendencies as her father, but Bhutto was undetered.
   ``I asked myself, why am I going around in circles? Why am I
leading a life that is physically exhausting and socially barren?''
Bhutto said. ``One gets strength from one's own country.''
   On Dec. 18, 1987, she married a wealthy, polo-playing Pakistani
businessman, Asif Zardari, greeting 100,000 of her followers at a
``people's reception'' after the ceremony.
   She made clear the match was an arranged and would not infringe on
her political quest.

------

American faces execution in Malaysia

   KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (UPI) - The trial of the first American to
be charged with drug trafficking under Malaysia's harsh anti-narcotics
law was delayed Monday as the judge considered whether to strike a key
piece of prosecution evidence.
   Kerry Lane Wiley, 38, a computer specialist from Sacramento,
Calif., faces the death sentence if convicted. He appeared calm as
defense attorney Shafee Abdullah asked the court to hold as inadmissable
evidence that Wiley had admitted ownership of the drug, because he had
not been informed of his rights at the time of his arrest.
   The request came after prosecution witness Zainal Mulid told the
court Wiley had admitted owning a parcel containing marijuana which he
delivered to Wiley's home near Kuala Lumpur last November.
   Postal officials had already been alerted by the customs department
that the parcel contained marijuana, which Wiley had allegedly posted to
himself from Thailand.
   Zainal, a customs official, accompanied the postman when the parcel
was handed to Wiley at his home in the suburbs of Kuala Lumpur.
   Zainal gave evidence he returned with four customs officers half an
hour later and raided the house. They discovered a bag in the storeroom
beneath the stairs which contained several items of clothing and several
tins containing dried leaves.
   Wiley is the first American to be charged under statutes which
mandate the death sentence for anyone caught with half an ounce or more
of heroin, 2 pounds of opium or 6.4 ounces of marijuana.
   Malaysia first introduced the death penalty for drug offenses in
1975 as an option for judges sentencing convicted traffickers. The
government amended the law in 1983 to make it mandatory for all
traffickers to be sent to the gallows.

				    -6-

   Since 1975, more than 100 people have been executed, including 27
foreigners, the most recent being eight Hong Kong citizens who were
hanged in May.

------

Cuba looks inward for help in financial crunch
By MICHAEL MOLINSKI

   SAN CRISTOBAL, Cuba (UPI) - President Fidel Castro is placing his
trust in pigs, chickens and a farmer named Ramon to pull Cuba through an
economic crisis sparked by a reduction in crucial aid from the Soviet
Union.
   The El Mango farm, about 50 miles west of Havana, is putting to
practical use the economic policies Castro's government is counting on
to get it through a ``special period'' of austerity.
   The policy is to look inward and prepare for complete isolation by
recycling and reusing everything.
   At El Mango, that means big changes for 44-year-old farmer Ramon
Cabrera and his son.
   Charcoal made from recycled wood is now used to power the tractors
through a special device hooked to the gasoline engine. Corn and sugar
stalks are used for paper and other items. Parts of the stalks and corn
not fit for human consumption is used in a new form of pig and chicken
feed controlled and allocated by the government.
   Virtually every part of the pig and every part of the chicken are
in turn used for various purposes - from industrial chemicals made from
pigskin to sealants made from egg shells. The excrement of the pigs is
in turn used to feed the fish in El Mango's pond, which in turn are fed
to humans. The excrement also goes back into the fields as fertilizer,
completing the chain that Castro hopes to perfect.
   A popular saying that Castro has drilled into the local mentality
is, ``Food for animals means food for humans.''
   These are only a few of the drastic changes Castro has been
implementing in the economy in recent months.
   Cuba is even experimenting with using pig excrement to power
engines, said Cabrera, who for the past 24 years has worked on the El
Mango farm.
   With a straw hat and no shirt, exposing a beer belly that hung over
his belt, Cabrera and his son go about their tasks on a sunny afternoon
of feeding the pigs, tending the fields, feeding the fish and oiling the
tractors.
   ``I'd rather be here than at home,'' Cabrera said proudly.
   Before about two months ago, El Mango looked and functioned like
any small Midwest farm of about 50 years ago. Now, methods designed to
improve efficiency have given rise to new, concrete pig and chicken
coops, and new irrigation systems fed by a charcoal-powered water pump.
   ``Out here, everyone works the same,'' said Cabrera, who is paid
the equivalent of about $40 a month, plus rations of food and clothing.
   Cabrera says the pig feed, which he calls ``Creole grain,'' has
near miraculous qualities that - as government officials have told him -

				    -7-

not only improve the quality of the meat, but also the quality of the
excrement, ``which is very important.''
   If discontent ever forces Castro out of power, it is not likely to
originate from the rural population.
   ``People out here talk of hard times, but they never speak
disfavorably of the Marxist system,'' said April Cotte, a U.S. college
student who recently spent two weeks doing church work on farms in rural
Cuba. ``People in the cities of higher intelligence levels are the ones
who talk of discontent.''
   At another nearby farm, administrator Orlando Perez Rodriguez toes
the government line.
   ``The country is in a crisis right now,'' he said, echoing a recent
speech by Castro. ``We don't have a lot of oil. We are going through a
special period. We have to prepare. We can expect isolation. The only
ones Cubans will rely on are other Cubans. We will be even stronger.''
   In the center of San Cristobal, the government has ``recycled'' a
local high school into a part-time exhibit of the ``special period''
preparations.
   Charts point to the 1,024,200 rifles that are being turned into
7,400 pieces of optical equipment. A lobster shell is tacked to a wall
above a piece of paper that tells how it will be ground into food
proteins and chemicals. Dental fillings will be ground into silver and
used in paint and electronics. Used oil pipes and railroad track will be
used to construct pig and chicken houses. Seeds from the higuereta tree
will be used for brake fluid. Factories will be made from old ships.
   Many of the programs are already under way. Others are still being
planned.
   At the entrance to the exhibition, a 10-feet-tall sign displays a
quote by Castro: ``We have to compete with our own products, with the
quality that exists here to develop local crafts industries to offer the
maximum quality for all that the tourist wants to buy.''
   Boosting the tourism industry is also part of the plan for the
special period.
   Will it all work?
   ``It's a survival economy,'' said one diplomat, pointing to the
recent cuts in Soviet aid. ``Castro is stockpiling. I think the economy
could go downhill very, very fast, and that is when (the government)
will crack.''
   Others were less drastic.
   ``One wouldn't want to predict the fall of the regime over the next
year or two, but for the first time, the regime's invulnerability is
being questioned,'' another diplomat said.
   With the end of the Cold War, the Cuban government ``has lost the
major justification for austerity and the police state that exist here.
All (Castro) has left to maintain the regime is the remaining
nationalism,'' the diplomat said.

------

Turkey closes Iraqi pipelines
By ADAM KELLIHER

				    -8-

United Press International

   Iraqi President Saddam Hussein faced crippling economic sanctions
and an awsome gathering of international military might with defiance
Tuesday, saying his country will fight for ``Arab muscle and Arab
honor.''
   The White House refused to comment on news reports that members of
the 82nd Airborne Division would be deployed to Saudi Arabia, which was
sending troops to its border with occupied Kuwait to counter a feared
attack by Iraqi troops.
   U.S., Soviet and French ships steamed toward the region, displaying
an unprecidented united front.
   Saddam challenged the global trade embargo and military buildup
with a warning that he would ``confront any imperialist, Zionist
attack'' against his forces massed on Iraqi-occupied Kuwait's border
with Saudi Arabia.
   In a statement in Saddam's name read in Baghdad, Iraq, and
translated by Cable News Network in Amman, Jordan, the Iraqi president
defended his conquest of Kuwait, exalting his country as ``a most
honorable country which fights for the Arab muscle and Arab honor.
   But in an apparent gesture to ease fears that Iraq had taken
Western hostages, Baghdad said it was considering freeing about 400
foreigners seized in Kuwait.
   The State Department said 39 Americans, including 11 oil workers in
Iraqi custody since the invasion Thursday, and U.S. citizens taken from
three hotels in Kuwait city were being held in a Baghdad hotel and told
they were not allowed to leave.
   There have been no indications of any mistreatment of the
foreigners, nor any signs that they are being held hostage.
   In keeping with the overwhelming U.N. Security Council decision
Monday to impose tough sanctions against Iraq - five days after the
world body condemned the invasion and demanded that Iraq pull its forces
from Kuwait - Turkey said it closed two Iraqi pipelines passing through
its territory.
   Turkish President Turgut Ozal said in an interview with CBS News,
``The Turkish ... pipeline is not giving any drop of oil to the
tankers.''
   However, the nation's oil minister later clafified that Turkey
would not close the pipeline, but would instead store Iraqi oil and
block it from leaving the country.
   The twin pipelines, running about 700 miles from the Kirkuk
oilfields in northern Iraq to a Mediterranean terminal at Yumurtalik,
transported about 1.5 million barrels of Iraqi oil a day.
   The United States hopes an oil embargo on Iraq engineered by
closing the Turkish and Saudi pipelines will compel Saddam to leave
Kuwait.
   But the official Iraqi News Agency quoted a government spokesman as
saying, ``We do not believe that Saudi Arabia would cut the flow of oil
through its territory because such a measure would seriously harm
Iraq.''
   Iraq and Saudi Arabia have a non-aggression pact, and most analysts

				    -9-

believe closing the pipeline in Saudi Arabia would be construed as a
declaration of war.
   To prevent Iraqi military action beyond Kuwait, the United States
has mounted a formidable naval presence and boosted its military
readiness in the Persian Gulf region.
   The Soviet Union and France bolstered their naval forces in the
region. Even Switzerland broke its long tradition of neutrality and said
it would support the U.N. sanctions.
   President Bush summoned Cabinet members to the White House and
maintained contacts with allied leaders as Defense Secretary Dick Cheney
headed home after talks with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak for talks
apparently aimed at mustering support for mounting U.S. pressure against
Iraq.
   Cheney met Saudi King Fahd on Monday with a key goal of persuading
the monarch to allow U.S. troops on Saudi soil, should military action
be decided against Iraq.
   Although White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said reports
of a possible naval blockade of Iraq were premature, Western leaders
said continued Iraqi intransigence could lead to such a move.
   In Baghdad, Saddam met Lt. Col. Alaa Hussein, the prime minister
and military commander of the ``provisional free Kuwait government,''
which was installed by Iraq after it overthrew the Kuwaiti leadership.
``Kuwait and Iraq share the same destiny,'' Alaa was quoted by the Iraqi
News Agency as saying.
   The news agency said Saddam assured Alaa that ``Iraq will confront
any imperialist, Zionist attack against the Kuwaiti uprising,''
referring to a rebellion Iraq claims it had to intervene to support.
   Iraqi media also reported that a flood of volunteers across Iraq
had led to the creation of 25 new military divisions - about 250,000 men
- to prop up the provisional government believed made up of Iraqi
military officers.
   Before the invasion, Iraq was estimated to have a 1 million-strong
battle-tested military and about 700,000 reserves.

------

ANC puts pressure on de Klerk to rein in troops
By JACK REED

   JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (UPI) - Religious and human rights
leaders closed ranks with the African National Congress Tuesday, warning
President Frederik de Klerk that failure to keep a grip on his security
forces endangers a breakthrough in peace talks.
   Less than 24 hours after announcing a suspension of its 29-year
limited guerrilla war against white rule, the ANC also cautioned the
international community that other forms of pressure, including economic
sanctions, must be maintained against Pretoria to ensure the seemingly
unstoppable reform process remains on track.
   ANC leader Nelson Mandela proposed the suspension - perhaps his
most important trump card - in the opening minutes of Monday's 15-hour
meeting with government negotiators headed by de Klerk, members of the

				    -10-

ANC team said.
   Mandela told de Klerk the suspension hinged on agreement on a
timetable for the release of 1,500 political prisoners, the return of
20,000 exiles and ANC participation in working groups supervising other
key reforms, among them altering contentious security laws.
   The government agreed, placing the ANC in an unprecedented and
close working relationship with Pretoria that de Klerk's right-wing
critics condemned Tuesday. Conservative Party leader Andries Treurnicht
called the accord ``untenable and illegal'' and said a ``dual power''
arrangement was emerging in South Africa.
   ``We went there to break the logjam in the peace process,'' said
South African Communist Party General Secretary Joe Slovo, a member of
the ANC team, ``and I believe we walked away with complete success in
that direction.''
   ``Right at the beginning our deputy president (Mandela) made the
point that time was not on our side, that the longer the process
stretches out the more time will be given to those who would like to
sabotage the process and prevent its success,'' he said.
   The agreement is expected to result in the phased release of
political prisoners starting Sept. 1 and the return of exiles a month
later. An April 30, 1990, deadline was set for the entire process.
   Despite heralding the breakthrough, which cleared away most
obstacles to formal negotiations on a new constitution, the ANC,
religious leaders and human rights organizations warned de Klerk Tuesday
to halt abuses by the army and police.
   The security forces stand accused of lagging far behind the
president in accepting a power-sharing deal between South Africa's 5
million whites and 28 million blacks. Charges range from using excessive
force on anti-government protests and torture of detainees to openly
backing the ANC's rival Zulu movement Inkatha in bloody clashes in Natal
province.
   ``It's a Frankenstein which has been created and inherited by a
racist set-up,'' Slovo told a news conference, noting the ANC ``reserves
the right'' to resume the armed struggle ``should the government fail to
carry out its undertakings.''
   ``One of the urgent and primary tasks which faces de Klerk... is to
tame and control the activities of the police force,'' he said. ``His
police force is part of the problem and not part of the solution.''
   The 72-year-old Mandela publicly warned de Klerk in a 1 a.m.
nationally televised news conference that the ANC's decision was a
``significant concession'' offered despite the government's failure to
bring ``state violence'' under control.
   ``A grave responsibility lies on the de Klerk government now to
stop all forms of state violence, particularly that of the police and
the army,'' South African Council of Churches General Secretary Frank
Chikane said in a statement Tuesday.
   ANC officials announced Tuesday that de Klerk had agreed to talks
later this month with the ANC and other linked movements locked in
battle with Inkatha on new initiatives to end the conflict, which has
claimed more than 3,000 lives since 1987 in Natal province.
   Since the release of Mandela from 27 years imprisonment in

				    -11-

February, the ANC has been under mounting pressure to suspend its armed
struggle to demonstrate its commitment to a peaceful end to the
country'S armed struggle. At the same time, the suspension is expected
to give de Klerk ammunition against his right-wing critics.
   The demand has dogged Mandela on his foreign tours, most recently
in the United States, where President Bush urged an end to the armed
struggle.
   Tuesday in Pretoria, Lawyers for Human Rights applauded the ANC's
decision and declared state-inspired violence as the ``gravest threat to
the prospects of a peaceful and negotiated settlement in South Africa.''

------

Soviet ships head for Persian Gulf
By JAMES ROSEN

   MOSCOW (UPI) - A Foreign Ministry official confirmed Tuesday that
two Soviet warships were heading for the Persian Gulf, but said Moscow
did not ``want to flex any muscles'' in the conflict over Iraq's
invasion of Kuwait.
   Soviet commentators said Iraq's ``plundering'' of its neighbor
Kuwait forced Moscow to stop arms exports to its longtime ally and speak
out against Baghdad.
   Foreign Ministry spokesman Yuri Grimitskikh confirmed reports from
Washington that Soviet troops were on their way to the Persian Gulf
aboard two ships steaming toward the site of conflict.
   Grimitskikh said political means should be used instead of force to
persuade Iraq to end its Kuwaiti incursion.
   ``We don't want to flex any muscles,'' he said.
   Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Belonogov said the Soviet Union
would scrupulously observe the U.N. Security Council's decision Monday
to impose full trade and economic sanctions against Iraq.
   ``Appropriate conclusions will be drawn from this, and I do not
doubt that the Soviet agencies through which cooperation (with Iraq) was
maintained will take the necessary measures,'' he said.
   Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and Secretary of State
James Baker condemned the invasion in an unprecedented joint statement
last Friday, a day after Iraqi troops poured into Kuwait. Moscow also
cut off all shipments of weapons to Iraq, its largest buyer.
   Political analyst Yuri Glukhov, writing in the Communist Party
newspaper, Pravda, said it was difficult for Moscow to act against a
friend.
   ``Considering the good-neighborly relations of long standing with
this country, the decision to take such sanctions did not come easy for
us,'' he said. ``In the most difficult times for Iraq, we took its side.
But it is one thing to participate in defending, another - in
plundering.''
   The Leninskoye Znamya newspaper said: ``The present conflict is all
the more unpleasant for us as it involves two states with which we have
maintained friendly relations. As for Iraq, those relations went so deep
that a treaty on friendship and cooperation was concluded between our

				    -12-

two countries.''
   Glukhov said that the Iraqi government of President Saddam Hussein
badly miscalculated in going into Kuwait because of disputes over
territory and oil prices.
   ``I don't know how carefully Baghdad considered its huge losses in
this essentially adventurist step,'' Glukhov said. ``Illusory ideas of
an easy and almost bloodless victory over a weak neighbor prevailed. As
to their military aspect, these ideas were not groundless.
   ``But in its political aspects this may prove to be a Pyrrhic
victory.''
   The Pravda analyst said that with the invasion of Kuwait, Iraq
added another border crisis to its already-strained ties with
neighboring Syria and Iran, with whom it fought an eight-year war that
formally ended in 1988.

------

Bulgarian government resigns

   SOFIA, Bulgaria (UPI) - Prime Minister Andrei Loukanov handed in
his government's resignation Tuesday in a planned move to clear the way
for the formation of Bulgaria's first democratically elected Cabinet in
four decades.
   The resignation, which had been expected, comes nearly two months
after the former Communist Party - now known as the Socialists - won an
absolute majority in the Parliament in the country's first true
elections since the communists took power in 1944.
   The official news agency BTA said Loukanov formally presented his
government's resignation to the Grand National Assembly but was expected
to stay on to form a new Cabinet.
   ``The Grand National Assembly will probably entrust him with the
leadership of the same Cabinet, which will stay in office until a new
Cabinet is formed,'' BTA said.
   Loukanov, a Socialist, has pledged to include members of the
democratic opposition in a broad-based coalition government that would
present a united front against Bulgaria's worsening economic crisis.
   Members of the main opposition party, the Union Democratic Forces,
have warmed up to the idea a Socialist-UDF coalition after last week's
election of UDF leader Zhelyu Zhelev as Bulgarian president.
   The current Cabinet, made up entirely of Socialists, was formed
Feb. 8 following a Communist Party congress that put the party firmly in
the hands of its reformist wing.
   Loukanov was a member of a moderate faction that ousted hard-line
leader Todor Zhivkov Nov. 10, ending 35 years of autocratic rule.

------

Ex-lawmakers barred from leaving Pakistan
By DENHOLM BARNETSON

   ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (UPI) - Officials of Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan

				    -13-

People's Party went into hiding Tuesday to evade arrest after her
government's dismissal and authorities ordered airports to stop some
former legislators from leaving the country, sources said.
   Bhutto, meanwhile, met with aides to discuss President Ghulam Ishaq
Khan's actions Monday in dismissing her 20-month-old government,
dissolving the National Assembly and declaring a state of emergency.
   A spokesman said Bhutto was likely to fly to the family home in the
southern port of Karachi, contradicting reports she had been placed
under house arrest.
   There was no indication that a curfew had been imposed anywhere in
the South Asian nation. Islamabad was calm Tuesday.
   Ishaq Khan said he had fired the government because of its
``corruption and nepotism'' and its failure to control escalating ethnic
violence.
   In a further sign of upheaval, the legislative assemblies of all
four provinces have been dissolved, the official television reported
Tuesday.
   The 37-year-old Bhutto, in a statement after she met with her
aides, said the president had made ``old and hackneyed charges, which
have only one object - to undermine the will of the people.
   ``The PPP is not afraid to face these charges,'' she said. ``It is
confident that if elections are held as promised, on schedule, it shall
be vindicated in the court of the people.''
   Security sources said authorities had issued airports with the
names of a number of prominent people, including some PPP legislators,
who have been barred from leaving the country.
   Army contingents moved into the capital and took control of the
Pakistan television headquarters, Radio Pakistan, the Information
Ministry and several other government offices.
   Bhutto charged that ``anti-democratic elements'' had taken up a
caretaker status in the government.
   ``The partisan and blatant nature of these steps clearly betray the
game plan - which is to deny the PPP any role in the future,'' she said.
   The PPP central committee is to meet in Karachi during the next few
days to decide whether to petition the Supreme Court to declare Ishaq
Khan's decree unconstitutional.
   Ishaq Khan Monday appointed opposition leader Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi
to head an interim government until elections scheduled for Oct. 24. The
assemblies of all four provinces were also dissolved.
   A PPP spokesman said the state of emergency was imposed because ``a
grave emergency exists in which the security of Pakistan is threatened
by external aggression.'' The emergency gives authorities wide powers of
detention.
   PPP sources said a number of the party's leaders had gone into
hiding, fearing arrest.
   Reaction to the president's announcement was muted in most of the
country Tuesday. But in Karachi, supporters of the Mohajir Qaumi
Movement, a major opposition party representing Mohajir migrants from
India, danced and shouted ``Down with Benazir'' outside Bhutto's family
home in the southern port.
   The opposition party has alleged the Bhutto government failed to

				    -14-

protect the interests of its supporters, and Mohajir youths have clashed
frequently in southern Sind Province in recent months with members of
the PPP youth wing.
   Bhutto took office in November 1988 following the first democratic
elections in 11 years in Pakistan, which has been under military rule
for almost two-thirds of its 43-year existence.
   As the first woman leader of a mainly Islamic country, she had come
under fire for failing to control growing ethnic violence in Sind and
alleged corruption by members of her administration and family, charges
which have increased tensions with the army.
   Bhutto's PPP has also failed to pass any significant legislation
and there have been persistent and acrimonious disputes with the
opposition.
   Ishaq Khan was formerly chairman of the Senate and took office on
the death in a mysterious August 1988 plane crash of President Mohammad
Zia ul-Haq, who had ruled the country since overthrowing Bhutto's
father, Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, in a 1977 coup.
   The elder Bhutto was hanged two years later on charges of plotting
to murder a political opponent.
   International observers said the military was attempting to regain
control of Pakistan by having Bhutto dismissed.
   ``This is a constitutional coup instigated by Pakistani military
leaders through Ishaq Khan,'' said Sugota Bose, an expert on the region
from Tufts University in Massachusetts.

------

Liberian rebel demands outside help

   MONROVIA, Liberia (UPI) - A Liberian rebel leader holding an
American and at least seven other foreigners said he would attack
Marines protecting the U.S. Embassy unless a U.S. or West African
peace-keeping force intervenes to end the country's civil war.
   Prince Johnson, who leads a breakaway rebel faction, made the
threat Monday as heavy fighting was reported in the area near the U.S.
Embassy.
   The rebel also indicated he would keep the foreigners hostage until
peace-keeping forces arrive. The hostages, all taken by rebels loyal to
Johnson, included three Britons, two West Germans, a Dutchman, an
Argentinian and a U.S. mining contractor identified as Chris Mendes, 27,
of Sacramento, Calif.
   Sources within the Lebanese community said some of their nationals
also were taken hostage and the total number of hostages in the West
African country was believed to be as high as 16.
   The rebel leader, whose forces control about half of Monrovia,
Saturday declared his intention of taking hostages. He said at the time
he was giving international organizations two days to agree to send a
peace-keeping force into Liberia, which was founded in 1822 by former
U.S. black slaves.
   Johnson said he told his men to single out American, British,
Lebanese and Indian civilians for detention first. The hostages were

				    -15-

taken from the Luxory Hotel Africa on the city's outskirts and U.S.
State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said they were held in
the town of Calweld, near Monrovia.
   Johnson told reporters who visited him on Monday he had rounded up
the foreigners the previous night. But the hostages themselves said they
had only been arrested an hour before they were allowed to talk to the
news media.
   Johnson, speaking Monday to a crowd of 3,000 in rebel-held Bushrod
Island, said: ``What this country really needs is the peaceful
intervention of the United States or ECOWAS (Economic Community of West
African States).''
   ``If they don't intervene, I will attack the American Marines,''
said Johnson, whose group is a breakaway faction of the original rebel
force headed by Charles Taylor fighting to oust President Samuel Doe
from power over the country, which became a republic on July 26, 1847.
   Sunday, U.S. Marines were airlifted into the war-torn country and
evacuated 62 U.S. government employees, relatives and civilians, two
Italians, one Canadian and eight Liberians.
   The State Department said the ``drawdown'' of embassy staff was
successful and that 41 embassy personnel, including the U.S. ambassador,
would remain in Monrovia. A total of about 300 Americans remained in
Liberia,
   Monday, more than 200 Marines who stayed after the evacuation to
protect the embassy and its staff abandoned three roadblocks they had
set up near the embassy in the Mamba Point District of the capital. The
Marines moved to set up defensive positions inside the walled compound,
an embassy spokesman said.
   ``There is no need to expose people,'' the embassy spokesman said.
``Initially we didn't know what people's reaction was going to be.''
   The embassy has insisted the Marines will not intervene in the
civil war, despite repeated calls from many Liberians for them to do so.
   Soon after the Marines withdrew from the street, heavy fighting
broke out Monday in the embassy district within a few hundred yards of
the Marine positions. The fighting continued throughout Monday
afternoon, although control of the area remained in doubt.
   Tutwiler said all major stores remain closed. There was no public
water, electricity or phone service, and food shortages were worsening.
   Five West African presidents met Monday in the Gambian capital of
Banjul to discuss an ECOWAS peace plan for Liberia. A peace-keeping
force made up largely of Nigerian troops already was preparing to land
in the country.
   Johnson said Sunday night he ordered the execution of the former
Liberian minister for youth and sports, Senator Fred J. Blay. He claimed
Blay had been sent by Doe to spy on his headquarters and ordered that he
be shot by firing squad.
   A Liberian congressman, William T. Jasvan, was paraded before
reporters Monday and led away with his hands bound. Johnson said he also
would be executed for spying.

------


				    -16-

Gorbachev-Yeltsin alliance lauded
By JAMES ROSEN

   MOSCOW (UPI) - The Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda praised
Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin on Tuesday for setting aside their
political differences for the good of the country.
   Pravda hailed the radical Yeltsin despite his announcement at the
28th Communist Party Congress last month that he was leaving the party
to concentrate on his duties as Russian Federation president, the post
he gained May 30 in parliamentary elections.
   Gorbachev and Yeltsin showed ``a high sense of responsibility and
political flexibility'' with their decision last week to form a joint
working group of their two governments to develop a comprehensive
program that might deliver the Soviet Union from economic disaster.
   Pravda noted Gorbachev, the Soviet president, and Yeltsin overcame
a history of personal enmity in agreeing to join forces and launch a
combined assault on the vast country's stubborn economic problems.
   ``A further deepening of the economic crisis was practically
unavoidable without unity of action between the (Soviet) Union and
Russia,'' Pravda said. ``But hopes for effective interaction seemed
illusory. The load of accumulated contradictions, mutual grudges of the
leaders and inertia of confrontation was too heavy.''
   Gorbachev and Yeltsin had clashed repeatedly over the past two
years. As recently as late May, Gorbachev convened a secret meeting of
all Communist Party deputies in the Russian republic's new legislature
and urged them to vote against Yeltsin in the presidential polls.
   Gorbachev's bid to stop Yeltsin failed, however, and the Siberian's
election to the highest post in Russia 10 weeks ago forced state-run
Soviet television to lift a coverage ban on him that almost certainly
had Gorbachev's blessing.
   The news of a Gorbachev-Yeltsin alliance rocked Moscow, with some
Soviet analysts seeing it as a nod by Gorbachev to Yeltsin's growing
power and others saying the move could be a sly attempt by the Soviet
president to coopt a potential rival.
   The vying between the two men appeared to peak last month, Pravda
noted, when Yeltsin announced plans to take over control of all banks on
Russian territory, which makes up three-quarters of the Soviet Union.
   Yeltsin also developed a bold 500-day plan to privatize most
property and free nearly all prices in Russia, a more radical strategy
than that pursued by Soviet Premier Nikolai Ryzhkov.
   Gorbachev issued a decree last week splitting control of banks
between the Soviet central bank Gosbank and the 15 republics. In an even
bigger concession, he then agreed to co-chair with Yeltsin the joint
working group on the economy and use Yeltsin's program as a blueprint.
   ``It looks like by Sept. 1, 1990, the country will really have at
its disposal an elaborated, serious and complete document opening up
prospects for the radicalization of reform and the stabilization of the
economy,'' Pravda said.
   ``If the (Gorbachev-Yeltsin) political alliance ... remains firm,
one may hope that the serious political and economic handicaps sure to
arise on the way to its realization will be overcome,'' it said.

				    -17-

   Yeltsin, who left Monday for a three-week tour of his giant
republic, was fired as Moscow Communist Party chief in fall 1987 after
he said the pace of reform was too slow.
   Yeltsin made a dramatic political comeback, however, gaining
election to the U.S.S.R. Congress of People's Deputies in March 1989,
joining the standing Soviet Parliament two months later and finally
claiming the Russian presidency in May.

------

Another Lenin statue dismantled

   MOSCOW (UPI) - Lithuania's old capital of Kaunas has dismantled its
monument to Vladimir Lenin, and citizens in a major Ukrainian city
signed a petition to haul down their Lenin statue n a growing
repudiation of the Soviet state's founder.
   The official Tass news agency said the conservative faction of the
divided Lithuanian Communist Party protested Monday's dismantling of the
Lenin statue in Kaunas, an 11th-century city that was Lithuania's
capital when the Baltic nation was independent between the two world
wars.
   In Lvov, an industrial city of 742,000 people in the rebellious
western Ukraine, anti-Communists are collecting signatures on a petition
to pull down its statue to Lenin, who instituted Communist rule in
Russia in November 1917, the independent Interfax news service said.
   Two smaller western Ukrainian towns, Chervonograd and Sosnovka,
took Lenin off the pedestals in their main squares last week. Another
city in the Ukraine, Ternopol, has decided to dismantle its Lenin
monument.
   The mounting assault on Lenin got the go-ahead when the Soviet
Communist Party's 28th Congress said in its platform last month that he
was just one many great socialist thinkers such as Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels.
   The dethroning of Leninism-Marxism as the ruling ideology in the
vast country set off demands for Lenin memorials to be pulled down.
   At the two sessions of the Congress of People's Deputies last year
and a third in March, some deputies suggested Lenin be taken out of the
mausoleum in Red Square and buried.
   Lenin, who died Jan. 21, 1924, was embalmed and placed in the
mausoleum on the orders of his successor, Josef Stalin.

------

U.S. sending troops to Saudi Arabia

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - The United States was preparing to send U.S.
ground troops and combat aircraft Tuesday night to Saudi Arabia to help
Saudi forces defend against a possible Iraqi attack, CBS News reported.
   The White House and the Pentagon declined to confirm or deny the
report.
   White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the United States would

				    -18-

not send U.S. forces without a Saudi invitation - one of the requests
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney made in Saudi Arabia Monday during a
meeting with King Fahd.
   ``I have no comment on any military movements,'' Fitzwater said.
``I won't confirm or deny any military movements.''
   CBS said elements of the 82nd Airborne at Fort Bragg, N.C., were on
the runway and would be sent Tuesday night on a flight to Saudi Arabia.
The 101st Airborne at Fort Campbell, Ky., may also be sent.
   Bush was reported to be on the phone talking to U.S. allies about
the plans.
   The president earlier told a Cabinet meeting ``that he viewed the
Iraqi troops lined up in Kuwait facing Saudi Arabia as a threat to the
United States security interests,'' Fitzwater said.
   ``That has been our message to Saudi Arabia and we believe that
they understand that, and are appreciative of that statement.''
   He said of the Iraqi presence near the border: ``We do have
information showing that the Iraqi forces are there in considerable
quantity and they are in an offensive posture and we believe there is an
imminent threat to Saudi Arabia from the way that they are positioned
and located in Kuwait.''
   Fitzwater added, ``There have been changes of a sort that cause us
to believe there is a growing and continuing threat.''

------

A look at U.S. Navy forces in Middle East

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Here are the names and types of the major U.S.
warships in the eastern Mediterranean Sea and Persian Gulf region:
(Eastern Mediterranean - Eisenhower battle group, 13 ships)
   USS Dwight D. Eisenhower, Nimitz-class, nuclear-powered aircraft
carrier
   USS Ticonderoga, guided-missile cruiser (with AEGIS air defense
system)
   USS Scott, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Tattnall, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Peterson, destroyer
   USS John L. Hall, guided-missile frigate
   USS Paul, frigate
   Oilers, ammunition ships, etc.
---
(Northern Arabian Sea - Independence battle group, 13 ships)
   USS Independence, Forrestal-class aircraft carrier
   USS Antietam, guided-missile cruiser(AEGIS equipped)
   USS Jouett, guided-missile cruiser
   USS Goldsborough, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Brewton, frigate
   USS Reasoner, frigate
   Oilers, ammunition ships, etc.
---
(Joint Task Force-Middle East in Persian Gulf, 8 ships)

				    -19-

   USS LaSalle, command ship
   Guided-missile cruiser (not identified)
   Destroyer (not identified)
   USS Robert G. Bradley, guided-missile frigate
   USS Taylor, guided-missile frigate
   frigate (not identified)
   frigate (not identified)
   frigate (not identified)
---
 (On way to Mediterranean - Saratoga battle group, 15 ships)
   USS Saratoga, Forrestal-class aircraft carrier
   USS Wisconsin, battleship
   USS Philippine Sea, guided-missile cruiser (AEGIS equipped)
   USS Biddle, guided-missile cruiser
   USS Sampson, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Spruance, destroyer
   USS Elmer Montgomery, frigate
   USS Thomas C. Hart, frigate
   USS Detroit, fast combat ship
   Oilers, ammunition ship, etc.
Mediterranean Amphibious Group - 2,100 combat Marines
   USS Inchon, amphibious assault ship
   USS Nashville, amphibious transport ship
   USS Whidbey Island, dock landing ship
   USS Newport, tank landing ship
   USS Fairfax County, tank landing ship

------

Stark sends Sullivan letter of apology
By JANET BASS

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Rep. Fortney ``Pete'' Stark, D-Calif.,
apologized to Health Secretary Louis Sullivan in an Aug. 6 letter for
calling the black Cabinet member a disgrace to his race, saying the
comments were ``indefensible.''
   The letter, marked personal but obtained by United Press
International Tuesday, comes several days after Sullivan demanded an
apology from Stark, a white liberal representing Oakland, Calif.
   ``I apologize to you for the inaccurate, inept, indefensible and
totally uncalled-for remarks regarding you as a human and as a
professional. On both counts, you stand above reproach. I hope you can
accept my apology,'' Stark said.
   During a photo session before a Tuesday meeting with Jesse Jackson,
Sullivan said he accepted the apology and considered the matter closed.
   ``It was unfortunate, and I now hope we can move on to productive
uses of our time to address the health and social services of our
citizens. That's why we're here,'' Sullivan said.
   ``Suffice it to say, we were all embarrassed and humiliated by the
statement of Congressman Stark,'' Jackson said. ``I hope it was just a
bad day for Congressman Stark.''

				    -20-

   Jackson said he was meeting with Sullivan for a general discussion
on the health needs of the black community.
   The brouhaha started at the end of a news conference last Thursday,
when Stark said he thought Sullivan, a physician, was a ``disgrace to
his profession and his race'' by opposing abortion funds for the poor
and national health insurance.
   Sullivan immediately demanded an apology, setting off a debate
between the men in newspapers and on the airwaves.
   Sullivan called the remarks racist and said, ``I don't live on Pete
Stark's plantation'' and that ``ultra-liberals'' should learn to accept
the ``independent thinking'' of blacks.
   Stark then responded that Sullivan indeed ``doesn't live on my
plantation. He lives on (White House chief of staff) John Sununu's
plantation.'' Stark accused Sullivan of reversing personal views to
conform with those of the Bush administration.
   On the House floor Friday, after demands for an apology from
various Republican members, Stark only said he ``blew it (by injecting
race in the discussion) ... because it obscures the fact that he is
carrying on a bankrupt policy for an administration who inadvertently
has been impacting the poor and the minorities in this country by
denying them decent medical care.''
   Sullivan raised the issue later Tuesday during an address to the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference in Richmond, emphasizing the
need for a diversity of views, even among the black community.
   ``This diversity is one of our strengths, and we don't need other
people to tell us what to think. We certainly don't need others to judge
the `correctness' of our thinking. That kind of paternalism is what this
organization has fought for many years, and continues to fight,''
Sullivan said.
   The secretary said the ``struggle for freedom and justice must
include improving the health of black Americans.''
   He said ``everyone should be able to obtain necessary health care''
but that national health insurance is the wrong way to achieve that
goal.

------

Barry jurors send note to judge

   (WASHINGTON) - The jury in the trial of Mayor Marion Barry today
sent a note to U-S District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson... asking if
one of the government witnesses in the case had an agreement to testify.
   Judge Jackson sent the jurors a note back saying there was NO
``written agreement'' between government witness Darrell Sabbs and
prosecutors that could have prompted his testimony.
   Sabbs... a friend of Barry's for two decades... testified he used
cocaine with Barry at least five times from 1986 to 1989.
   But the testimony that was most important was his statement that he
used cocaine with Barry on the date charged in Count 11... one of the 10
misdemeanor cocaine possession counts facing Barry.
   The jury's question could be important because the government

				    -21-

acknowledged that many of its other witnesses testified under plea
agreements or with grants of immunity.
   The jury is in its fifth day of deliberations in an attempt to
reach a verdict on 14 cocaine and perjury charges.
   The jury... which has been sequestered for eight weeks... met for
nearly eight hours yesterday without reaching a verdict and returned to
the jury room at about nine-30 this morning.

------

1989 state tax revenues increase
By VINCENT DEL GIUDICE
UPI Business Writer

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - State tax revenues increased 7.5 percent in 1989
to $284 billion from $264 billion in 1988, the Commerce Department said
Tuesday, in part reflecting fewer dollars from the federal government.
   General sales and gross receipts taxes, the largest source of state
tax revenue, were up 7.3 percent last year to $93.4 billion, according
to the report by the department's Census Bureau.
   Individual state income taxes increased 10.7 percent, from 1988 to
1989, to $88.7 billion, while corporate net income taxes rose 10.4
percent to $23.9 billion, the department said.
   ``The federal government has played a more limited role in recent
years,'' said Robert Dederick, chief economist at Northern Trust in
Chicago. ``States have had to take care of themselves more.''
   States have also had to meet greater needs as their tax bases grow,
grapple with spirling education costs, struggle to preserve the
environment, and in many cases repair long-neglected roads, bridges and
highways.
   In 1989, Oregon and California led the union with revenue gains of
22.5 percent and 14.2 percent, respectively, followed by Delaware at
13.4 percent, Alaska at 12.7 percent and Idaho at 11.5 percent.
   But two states reported declines - Utah was off by a huge 11.4
percent, and South Dakota dipped 1.7 percent.
   The Commerce Department also said that more than half of the state
tax revenues were collected in nine states: California, $41.2 billion;
New York, $26.6 billion; Texas, $14 billion; Pennsylvania, $12.6
billion; Florida $12.5 billion; Illinois, $11.8 billion; Michigan, $11.1
billion; Ohio, $10.8 billion; and New Jersey, $10.5 billion.
   State taxes are currently deductible from federal income taxes.
   But last month, the Bush administration floated a deficit reduction
plan that included limiting to $10,000 the total amount of state and
local taxes that could be deducted from the federal taxes. Currently,
there is no limit.
   The administration proposal, which caused an uproar among state and
municipal officials, would affect primarily wealthier Americans making
more than $100,000 a year.

------


				    -22-

MALDEF urges public support for civil rights efforts
By RENEE HAINES

   SAN ANTONIO (UPI) - A national Hispanic rights group, condemning
efforts to label the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1990 a ``quota bill,''
Tuesday urged that the public lobby Congress to adopt the measure
without watering it down first.
   The Senate and House already have adopted similar versions of the
bill the Bush Administration has deplored as a mere ``quota bill''
disguised as civil rights legislation. The measure now will be
considered by a conference committee to consider any compromises.
   ``It is not a quota bill,'' Guadalupe Luna, staff attorney of the
San Antonio-based Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund,
said about proposed legislation that contains no references to setting
any quotas.
   Luna said all the bill seeks to do is reverse the effects of
several recent Supreme Court decisions that weakened existing civil
rights rules. Those decisions, among other things, will make it more
difficult for victims to prove discrimination in court.
   ``What the Supreme Court did last June was reverse 28 years of
well-established law,'' she said, adding that no rush to establish
quotas had occurred in all those years under the civil rights
protections she and others want restored.
   The House approved the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1990 on Friday
following the Senate's endorsement of its version July 19.
   But Luna said a compromise measure must be approved by December.
   ``Civil rights laws cannot be helped without the help of the
community. I have to go to the communty and ask them to write letters,''
Luna said. ``If this bill isn't signed by December ... we'll have to
start all over again.''
   While the Senate version contains no reference to quotas, she said,
the House version goes further to specifically state no quotas will be
required.
   MALDEF spokesman Judith Sanders-Castro said the Bush Administration
has raised the ``quota'' issue as a ploy to divide the nation's workers
in an attempt to bring about the defeat of the bill.
   ``It is an attempt to pit working people against each other.
They're trying to convince Anglos ... they will be losing jobs to
(minorities). That is not going to happen,'' Sanders-Castro said.

------

Yeutter to visit Asia

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter will spend
two weeks in meetings with agricultural leaders of four Asian nations,
including time in Japan to urge it to open its markets to U.S. rice, it
was announced Tuesday.
   The trip to Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Japan will be devoted
to discussions of world trade reform, the new farm policy law being
written by Congress and other agricultural issues.

				    -23-

   Yeutter was scheduled to depart Thursday for Japan to begin the
tour. The U.S. rice industry gave Yeutter two symbolic bags of rice to
carry on the trip to Japan. The island nation bars virtually all imports
of foreign rice.
   U.S. trade officials twice have rejected rice industry complaints
against Japan in favor of making reform of its rice policies a part of
world trade talks. Those negotiations are due to conclude in December.
   Officials said Yeutter would be in Bangkok, Thailand, Aug. 12-14,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Aug. 15-16, Hong Kong Aug. 16-17, and Tokyo Aug.
17-23.
   Asia buys 40 percent of U.S. agricultural exports. Japan is the No.
1 customer for U.S. farm goods and is forecast to buy $8.3 billion worth
of them this fiscal year.

------

Bush sets trip to Denver in September

    WASHINGTON (UPI) - Although he delayed a Latin American trip to be
on hand for budget talks, President Bush still plans to spend at least
eight days on the campaign trail during September, including a trip to
Colorado, the White House said Monday.
    Press secretary Marlin Fitzwater confirmed that Bush had postponed
the planned trip Sept. 16-21 to Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay
and Chile ``based on the need to be personally involved in the budget
negotiations in September.''
    At the same time, the spokesman announced a rigorous campaign
schedule for the president that will take him to more than a dozen
cities on behalf of at least eight Republican candidates.
    On Sept. 11, Bush will fly first to Denver for a fund-raiser for
the Hank Brown for Senate campaign, and then to Los Angeles for a
fund-raiser for Sen. Pete Wilson, who faces a tough race for governor
against former San Francisco Mayor Dianne Feinstein. Bush travels Sept.
12 to San Francisco for another fund-raiser on Wilson's behalf.
    On Sept. 3, Bush will return from a 25-day vacation in
Kennebunkport, Maine. The continuing negotiations with congressional
leaders on the fiscal 1991 budget and reducing the budget deficit are
tentatively set to resume that week.
    By law, failure to reach an agreement would force the government
to impose an estimated $100 billion in across the board cuts in vital
services on Sept. 30.
    But the president, as evidenced by the schedule announced Monday,
will also be fairly preoccupied with campaigning for Republican
candidates in the November elections.
    According to Fitzwater, Bush also plans trips:
    -Sept. 6, to Topeka, Kan., and Tallahassee, Fla., to attend
fund-raisers for Kansas Gov. Mike Hayden, who faces a tough re-election
primary on Tuesday, and Rep. Bill Grant of Florida, who recently
switched to the GOP.
    -Sept. 9, to New York for a dedication ceremony at Ellis Island.
    -Sept. 26-27, starting in Akron, Ohio, on behalf of George

				    -24-

Voinovich, former mayor of Cleveland who is running for governor,
heading next to Chicago for Rep. Lynn Martin, who is running for the
Senate. The next day, he will attend a fund-raiser in Minneapolis for
whoever wins the Independent-Republican gubernatorial primary, head next
to Cleveland on behalf of Voinovich again before a final stop in Detroit
for unidentified Michigan GOP candidates.
    In addition, Bush will travel to New York Sept. 30, as previously
announced, to attend an international summit on children. The following
day, Oct. 1, he is to address the United Nations General Assembly.

------

White House says talk of naval blockade premature
BY HELEN THOMAS
UPI White House Reporter

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - President Bush summoned Cabinet members to the
White House Tuesday for an update on the Persian Gulf crisis and White
House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said reports of a possible naval
blockade of Iraq are ``premature.''
   ``We have the sanctions in place,'' Fitzwater told reporters,
referring to the overwhelming vote Monday by the U.N. Security Council
for a tough economic boycott against Iraq for its invasion of
neighboring oil-rich Kuwait. ``We expect that to happen,'' Fitzwater
added, saying, ``This blockade talk is premature.''
   However, if the embargo fails to be effective, Western leaders,
including British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Canadian Prime
Minister Brian Mulroney said they expected continued intransigence by
Iraq could lead to a military blockade.
   Bush called for ``full and total implementation'' of Monday's U.N.
Security Council decision to impose an economic and military embargo on
Iraq.
   Bush said the U.N. embargo, adopted by a 13-0 vote, ``gives an
awful lot of muscle to countries and we want to see them use it. ...
Certainly petroleum is considered under that definition, subject to
being cut off.''
   On Monday, following a meeting with Bush, Mulroney, Thatcher and
NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner all praised the U.N. Security
Council decision.
   Asked if he thought a blockade would be necessary, Mulroney said,
``If you look at the geography, it certainly wouldn't hurt at all.''
   Thatcher added that if the sanctions were not effective, a blockade
would be considered. ``If not, we shall ... have to jointly consider
collective action of the kind of thing such as a blockade.''
   Bush said Monday he was ``ruling out nothing at all'' in
considering his next moves.
   Bush has received a full report on a meeting U.S. Charge d'Affairs
Joseph Wilson had with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in Baghdad Monday.
   Fitzwater declined to reveal any details of Saddam's message to
Bush. The Washington Post reported Tuesday that Saddam told the U.S.
diplomat that Kuwait now belongs to Iraq and there was no going back.

				    -25-

The Post quoted a U.S. official as characterizing Saddam's message as:
``It's a done deal.''
   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney visited Monday with Saudi officials
with a key goal of persuading King Fahd to allow U.S. personnel on Saudi
soil in light of Iraq's invasion of oil-rich Kuwait. The outcome of the
meeting remained unclear.
   On Tuesday, Cheney flew to Egypt to meet with President Hosni
Mubarak in the seaport city of Alexandria. Mubarak's government is
allied with Iraq but has denounced the invasion through the 21-nation
Arab League.
   There were reports that Egyptian and Moroccan forces were being
sent to Saudi Arabia to bolster its defense against a massive buildup of
Iraqi troops close to the Saudi border.
   In other developments, Prince Saud, the Saudi foreign minister, was
expected to arrive in Washington for consultations with Bush and other
administration officials.
   Fitzwater said that Secretary of State James Baker was still
expected to travel Wednesday to Turkey where he will meet with Turkish
President Turgut Ozal on the gulf crisis. Ozal is reported to have shut
down the two Iraqi pipelines that pass through his country to the
Mediterranean, in accordance with the U.N. sanctions.
   A State Department official said Monday the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad
was checking on a ``sketchy report'' that 12 of 28 Americans had arrived
in the Iraqi capital. The Americans were part of several hundred
Westerners reportedly taken from hotels in Kuwait following the Iraqi
invasion. There was no word on their location and U.S. officials
restated that there was not enough information available to classify
them as hostages.
   Pentagon and administration officials reported that Iraqi troops
remained massed dangerously near the Saudi Arabia border, despite
earlier assurances from Saddam that the 100,000-strong invasion force
would be withdrawn.
   On Monday, five warships left Norfolk, Va., to join U.S. forces in
the Persian Gulf region where a total of 49 warships - some with
aircraft capabilities - are expected to position themselves within
striking distance of Iraq by next week.
   The military buildup also included ships from France, Great Britain
and the Soviet Union.

------

Cheney to meet with Mubarak
By ADAM KELLIHER
United Press International

   Defense Secretary Richard Cheney traveled to Egypt Tuesday for
talks with President Hosni Mubarak apparently aimed at mustering support
for Washington's mounting economic, political and military pressure
against Iraq.
   Cheney visited Monday with Saudi officials with a key goal of
persuading King Fahd to allow U.S. personnel on Saudi soil in light of

				    -26-

Iraq's invasion of oil-rich Kuwait. The outcome of the meeting remained
unclear.
   U.S. Embassy officials said Cheney was en route to the Egyptian
city of Alexandria for talks with Mubarak, whose government is allied
with Iraq but has denounced the invasion through the 21-nation Arab
League.
   ``We expect Secretary Cheney to arrive today for a brief stopover
to meet President Mubarak and then return to Washington,'' an embassy
spokesman said.
   The Egyptian leader was also scheduled to meet Izaat Ibrahim, the
vice chairman of Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council and Saddam's
right-hand man, who departed from Baghdad on another mission of shuttle
diplomacy.
   The potentially volatile situation in the Middle East, source of
much of the world's oil, further aggravated major financial markets
Tuesday. Tokyo's key Nikkei average plunged 1,326.67 points, or 4.6
percent, during the morning session, before recovering in the afternoon
to close down 946.46 points.
   The Nikkei's drop followed a bad day on Wall Street where the Dow
industrial suffered its seventh-biggest decline Monday in heavy trading,
plunging more than 90 points.
   The political uncertainty in the region has sent oil prices soaring
and raised fears of inflation in oil-importing nations such as the
United States and Japan.
   Saudi and U.S. military officials prepared for a possible Iraqi
attack on the oil-rich kingdom.
   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney went to Riyadh, reportedly to discuss
strategy for sending U.S. troops into Saudi Arabia should Iraqi troops
massed at the Kuwaiti-Saudi border attack. Saudi Arabia has long
resisted allowing U.S. troops on its soil.
   Saudi Arabia reportedly has fully mobilized its army and massed
troops near a neutral zone of oil fields along the country's border with
occupied Kuwait. In response, Iraq ordered drills to evacuate 4 million
citizens from Baghdad in the event of an air attack and issued rifles to
government supporters.
   The Pentagon announced in Washington further U.S. naval vessels
were assigned to strengthen forces in the vicinity of the crisis zone.
   In New York, the U.N. Security Council imposed harsh economic
sanctions aimed at pressuring Saddam to remove his forces from
neighboring Kuwait, where he invaded Thursday with up to 100,000 troops
and installed a provisional government. Sources said about 700 people
were killed in the Iraqi invasion.
   Iraq invaded its oil-rich neighbor after accusing it of
overproducing oil and driving down prices. International observers have
said Saddam seized Kuwait in hopes of infusing Iraq's troubled economy
with its riches and in an effort to appease his military supporters.
   Along with the U.N. sanctions, Turkish President Turgut Ozal told
ABC television he would halt the flow of oil through two Iraqi pipelines
that cut through Turkey to the Mediterranean, although earlier Monday
Iraq had already cut off one of the pipelines and reduced oil flow
through the other because of waning demand.

				    -27-

   Baghdad Radio, monitored in Beirut, reported that Saddam issued a
veiled warning to Bush, telling Joseph Wilson, the U.S. charge
d'affaires in Baghdad: ``Iraq is capable of protecting its rights and
interests whatever the pressures ... and the country's readiness to
sacrifice for that cause is unlimited.''
   However, the radio reported that Saddam also accepted ``legitimate
international interests in the area'' and wanted ``normal relations with
the United States on the basis of mutual respect.''
   Egypt's Middle Eastern News service said Saddam's first message to
Bush since the dispute erupted included a warning against ``any behavior
that may undermine security and stability in the area.''
   Officials in Bonn, Washington and London said Iraqi troops ordered
about 400 foreigners, including 28 Americans, out of Kuwait city hotels
and took them in buses toward Baghdad. Eleven other American oil workers
are already being detained in Iraq.
   After Saddam's hours-long meeting with the U.S. charge d'affaires
in Baghdad, State Department leaders met for about 15 minutes with Iraqi
Ambassador Mohamed al-Mashat in Washington.
   A State Department official described the meeting between al-Mashat
and Assistant Secretary of State John Kelly as ``tense'' and said Kelly
reminded the Iraqi of his country's responsibility for the safety of
Americans and other foreigners in Kuwait, where Iraq has created a
government in Kuwait to replace that of the emir, who fled to Saudi
Arabia.
   State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said it was too
early to classify the missing Americans as hostages, but said Washington
holds Iraq ``responsible for the safety of Americans and of all foreign
nationals.''
   According to State Department figures, some 3,000 Americans had
been in Kuwait last week. Some of them apparently have left, but
Tutwiler said most are believed to still be in Kuwait.
   A British Foreign Office spokesman said 200 people stranded aboard
a British Airways jumbo jet when the invasion began were included in the
roundup.


------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

Commentary on Today's News

`Bloody Sunday' sparked Voting Act
Commentary on Today's News:
By LEON DANIEL
UPI Chief Correspondent
   WASHINGTON (UPI) - The Voting Rights Act enacted a quarter of a
century ago changed America irrevocably and for the better.
   Most of the credit for that landmark legislation goes to the
martyred Martin Luther King Jr. and the late President Lyndon Johnson,
who signed it into law in the Rotunda of the Capitol on Aug. 6, 1965.

				    -28-

   But few of the heroes of the civil rights movement could match the
courage of John Lewis, now a Democratic congressman from Georgia.
   Lewis was arrested 40 times and often beaten brutally during the
1960s struggle for the right to vote.
   I witnessed some of his arrests and was on the scene to report for
United Press International the historic march Lewis led in Selma, Ala.,
that was to become known as ``Bloody Sunday.''
   I saw him clubbed to the ground by Alabama state troopers. He
suffered a concussion.
   The brutal attack on the 500 men, women and children on March 7,
1965, by the troopers and a mounted posse of local rednecks wielding
bullwhips and cattle prods outraged the nation and spurred Congress to
pass the Voting Rights Act.
   ``If anyone had told me then I would someday be in Congress,''
Lewis said to me last spring in Selma at a re-enactment of the historic
march, ``I would have said he was crazy.''
   Considered by many reporters who covered the civil rights movement
to be its most courageous leader, Lewis understood the importance of the
atrocity at Selma in the struggle for the right to vote.
   ``If it were not for Selma in 1965,'' Lewis told me, ``I wouldn't
be in Congress today.''
   There has been a dramatic increase in the number of black elected
officials in the quarter-century since passage of the Voting Rights Act.
   Some 7,370 blacks now hold elective office, compared to fewer than
500 in 1965.
   The state with the most, 705, is Alabama, where Lewis was born.
   When Lewis led that ``Bloody Sunday'' march, only 2.1 percent of
Selma's voting-age blacks were registered to vote, compared to 70
percent today.
   The Voting Rights Act still is needed to protect the rights of
minority voters. It still is the key for opening the political process
to all Americans.
   Frank Parker, author of ``Black Votes Count: Political Empowerment
in Mississippi after 1965,'' contends that racial gerrymandering and
at-large elections are used to weaken minority voting power.
   Parker breaks down gerrymandering into three forms: cracking,
stacking and packing.
   Cracking is fragmenting minority communities into many districts.
   Stacking is diluting minority voting strength by combining minority
population concentration with a larger white population concentration.
   Packing is denying minorities influence in adjoining districts by
overconcentrating them in a single district.
   Now minorities can deal with such shady shenanigans in the courts,
thanks to the heroic struggle of men and women like Lewis.

---------
Ditch the Goodwill Games
By JIM SLATER
UPI Sports Writer
   SEATTLE (UPI) - More Goodwill. Less Games.
   What a waste of time and money the Goodwill Games were. They serve

				    -29-

no purpose now, if they ever did. In any case, they should never be held
again.
   People of the world are too wise for this Olympics wanna-be. They
aren't paying attention. As a result, Ted Turner takes a $40 million
bath on this turkey. Turner couldn't sell this fiasco, even by
colorizing a city known for overcast.
   The Goodwill Games symbolize what the United States has become.
Public relations. Image. Style over substance. Events no longer exist on
merit. They exist because they can, not because they should.
   This event had the mechanics of a biggie but none of the soul. It
was a made-for-television monster starring Larry King as the ``see only
good'' talking video head. He told us how great things were on a daily
basis. Those of us here knew better. Fortunately for King's career, no
one was watching anyway.
   The Games lasted far too long for the competition schedule. Most
athletes used the event as a tuneup for a world championship.
Competitions were scheduled to avoid conflicts with those world
championships. Athletes and television people who ran the Games knew it
was only an athletic appetizer.
   Some winners emerged. People made friends with others around the
world. Many saw Seattle for the first time and enjoyed it. The Games did
not interfere with Sunday's hydroplane race, the area's major annual
event. Those benefits weren't worth the cost, even if I'm not paying.
   For 17 days - longer than the Seoul Olympics - happy Goodwill Games
rhetoric came at us like a smiling, bouncing gymnast.
   It may not make for the most compelling drama, but then again it's
a whole lot better than terrorists at the Munich Olympics or Africans
marching out in Montreal.
   Does the world need a Goodwill Games come 1994? The Barcelona
Olympics will be 2 years old by then. World championships of all sorts
will have come and gone. Athletes the world over will have had ample
opportunity to test themselves.
   In any case, the political climate is far different now from when
this television creation first began in 1986. The world has shown that
ideas can travel from the West to Eastern Europe and back again. In many
quarters, there is new hope for peace.
   The Goodwill Games was a Ted Turner production from start to
finish. The undertaking could cost him $40 million. The next Goodwill
Games are scheduled for Moscow and Leningrad in 1994. Whether Turner
wants to risk another $40 million to bring the world women's judo,
rhythmic gymnastics and synchronized swimming remains to be seen.
   Then again, maybe the more important question is whether Jane Fonda
will be on Turner's arm four years down the road.
   Still, it's Ted Turner's money, and he's got plenty of it. But
money for the Goodwill Games could be better spent elsewhere. Just
because Turner can throw this thing together is no reason to do so.
Wealth does not make worthiness.
   Let's put the Goodwill Games to bed. We don't need them. In color
or black and white.

---------

				    -30-

Kuwait: poor little unloved rich kid
By JIM ANDERSON
   WASHINGTON (UPI) - One of the discoveries made by American
policy-makers in the crisis created by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait is that
the Arab world has been surprisingly divided in its willingness to stand
up for a country that has been mugged by its stronger neighbor.
   One reason, according to a long-time administration Middle East
analyst who declines to be further identified is that Kuwait has been
the George Steinbrenner of Middle East politics: greedy, autocratic,
unpredictable and insensitive to criticism from the outside world.
   In the Middle East, most rivalries can be traced to oil or money,
and Kuwait has plenty of both.
   Not content with an oil quota set by the Organization of Petroelum
Exporting Countries that made it one of the richest countries in the
world, Kuwait has been cheating for the last several years on the amount
of oil it takes out of the ground.
   The OPEC quota for 1989 had been 1.1 million barrels a day. But, by
running the pumps overtime, Kuwait increased that output to about 1.8
million barrels a day. This not only had the effect of increasing
Kuwait's own national income, far beyond its own ability to spend, but
it also created an oil glut that lowered the world price of oil, in
effect robbing other oil producers, such as Iraq, of some of the income
they needed.
   For a period, such unrestrained greed was tolerated by the rest of
the Arab world because Kuwait had been relatively generous about giving
some of it away in the form of aid to countries such as Jordan, Syria
and Iraq.
   But that foreign aid level has dropped sharply, from $1 billion a
year in 1981 to $140 million in 1988.
   Another form of pumping some of that Kuwaiti money into the Arab
world was in the form of remittances - wages paid to migrant laborers
from other countries, who would send most of their wages back home.
   Kuwait, ruled by the al-Sabah family, established sort of a caste
system, based on nationalities. The Egyptians were at the bottom of the
occupational scale - street sweepers and garbage collectors. A bit
further up were the Syrians and Jordanians, who supplied the skilled
labor.
   The Palestinians, many of them educated at American universities in
Cairo and Beirut, were the middle managers and were the backbone of the
broadcasting and newspaper industry.
   The Pakistanis were the shopkeepers and the money-changers, and a
few Westerners were installed as managers of banks and insurance
companies.
   At the top of this food chain were the small group of Kuwaiti
families, who collected the money, which came directly or indirectly
from oil. One key was a Kuwaiti law which required that at least 50
percent of every business must be owned by a Kuwaiti.
   The impact was a form of legal extortion on foreign investment.
Every outsider - whether General Motors or McDonald's - had to give 50
percent of its investment and profit to a Kuwaiti business partner, who
often did nothing except sign his name on various documents a couple of

				    -31-

times a week.
   Even that system was tolerable as long as the money kept flowing,
but when the price of oil dropped - partly because of Kuwaiti
over-production - the migrant laborers were precipitously expelled.
   Foreign investors resented seeing 50 percent of their dwindling
profits go to inactive Kuwaiti ``partners.''
   For the past 10 years, Kuwait has been able to keep peace on its
border with Iraq by paying blackmail, in the form of loans, to Iraq to
keep its war with Iran going, and by permitting vast shipments of arms
destined for Iraq to come in Kuwaiti ports. In Kuwait, the arms were
shipped north to Iraq in long, nocturnal convoys of trucks.
   In order to keep peace with the Iranians, the Kuwaitis played a
double game, closing a blind eye to hundreds of small boats which
slipped across the Gulf every night, smuggling arms to Iran, thus
breaking the embargo set by Western nations.
   When Iraq demanded last week ``forgiveness'' of $2.4 billion in
past ``loans,'' the Emir of Kuwait said he wanted to bargain. Two hours
later, the Iraqis walked out of the bargaining session, with the pretext
they needed for the invasion, describing Kuwait's sharp practices as
``aggression.''
   Within 48 hours, Iraqi tanks were rolling south across the Kuwaiti
sands.

---------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

Special Feature

Judge frees man in apparent misidentification
   SALEM, Va. (UPI) - A judge freed Alexandria roofer Kenneth Edward
Bailey on bail from the Roanoke County Jail on Monday, a few weeks after
he was charged with attempted rape and attempted murder in what now
appears to be a case of mistaken identity.
   Though two sexual-assault victims positively identified Bailey and
he failed a polygraph test that he had hoped would prove his innocence,
Roanoke County substitute General District Court Judge John Apgar let
him out on $1,000 bail.
   Apgar took the action, reducing bail from $900,000, after hearing
evidence the real culprit might be Timothy Joseph Burnopp, a Franklin
County rape suspect who authorities said confessed to one attack with
which Bailey is charged.
   Bailey's defense attorney, Vince Lilley, said Burnopp looks so much
like Bailey he could be his twin. Burnopp also was using the name of his
dead uncle - Kenneth Bailey.
   Kenneth Edward Bailey is not in the clear yet, but Lilley said he
hopes the matter will be settled at an Aug. 22 preliminary hearing or
perhaps before then.
   Roanoke County Assistant Commonwealth's Attorney Mark Claytor said
he was not ready to drop charges of attempted murder, attempted rape and
abduction with intent to defile yet because of the eyewitness

				    -32-

identifications and because he had not talked to Burnopp.
   The case is ``everybody's worst nightmare,'' Lilley said. ``It's
one of those horrifying things. It's TV movie material.''
   Police seemed to have a solid case against Bailey until Burnopp was
arrested Friday night in the Thursday rape of a Franklin County woman.
   The case started in early July, when a woman riding her bicycle on
the Blue Ridge Parkway reported a man attempted to assault her. She
described the assailant and his car, and gave police a license-plate
number.
   On July 9, the same man in the same car stopped a woman driving the
parkway by flashing his lights behind her. He pulled her out of her car,
attempted to rape her and then strangled her until she lost
consciousness. The woman survived the attack.
   When police ran a check on the tag, they found it registered under
a fictitious Callaway address to a Kenneth Bailey with the same
birthdate as Kenneth Edward Bailey of Alexandria.
   So when Kenneth Edward Bailey came up on the state computer as
being on probation for a misdemeanor, Roanoke County police asked
Alexandria authorities for photo. The two Blue Ridge Parkway victims
positively identified Bailey as their assailant through a photo lineup.
   Bailey protested he had never even been to the Roanoke Valley when
he was arrested in Alexandria by Roanoke County police officers. But
when police then found outstanding Roanoke County traffic warrants for a
Kenneth A. Bailey, the officer who had issued those tickets picked
Kenneth Edward Bailey out of a crowd of prisoners.
   Then, last week, Bailey failed a lie-detector test, which he
attributed to nerves.
   Last Thursday, while Bailey still was in jail, a Franklin County
woman was raped when she stopped after a car, which matched the
description of the car in the earlier attacks, flashed its lights from
behind. The driver, who also matched the description of the assailant in
the other attacks, pulled her out of the car, raped her and then choked
her into unconsciousness, Lilley said.
   Franklin County authorities arrested Burnopp and charged him with
rape and sodomy in the Thursday attack after spotting his car Friday
night.
   Judge Apgar apparently had no problem lowering Bailey's bail after
hearing the story in court Monday.
   ``This case may very well be one that's dismissed by the
commonwealth before preliminary hearing,'' Apgar said in setting the new
bail.

------

Unionized commercial workers set plans against multinationals
By CARLOS BREZINA
UPI Business Writer

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - With internationalization of retailing on the
increase, unions representing commercial workers in 20 countries met
Monday and vowed to join forces in fighting unfair labor practices they

				    -33-

said multinational companies engage in.
   Their conference, sponsored by the United Food and Commercial
Workers International Union and the Geneva-based Federation of
Commercial, Clerical, Professional and Technical Employee Unions, is the
first to plan coordinated strategies for dealing with international
companies.
   ``Just as our employers hopscotch national borders and oceans, so
too must labor's strategies,'' said UFCW International President William
H. Wynn in hisopening adress.
   Wynn said workers worldwide are threatened by multinationals trying
to apply ``lowest-common-denominator labor protections.''
   Using as an example of this a free-trade treaty signed by the
United States and Canada, Wynn said that ``the U.S. government eyes
Canada's superior package of social insurance and sees a threat to free
trade.''
   But intead of raising U.S. standards, the Bush administration ``is
demanding that Canada reduce its benefits to our inferior levels,'' Wynn
continued.
   The internationalization of retailing promises greater choice and
perhaps lower prices for many of the world's consumers, said Philip
Jennings, acting general secretary of FIET. ``But this must come from
economies of scale and increased efficiency, not lowering workers'
standards.''
   Jennings exhorted the unions to develop a ``database giving precise
information on companies, their union strength and where we have
collective bargaining rights, and more systematic reporting on retailers
which abuse union rights.''
   He also asked for a global campaign to obtain more rights for
workers in takeovers and for ``corporate campaigns which involve close
coordination and involvement of our affiliates.''
   Working groups will sit down Tuesday to develop strategies for
organizating workers and combatting union-busting, aimed at specific
multinational companies. The Tuesday meetings will take place behind
closed doors.
   According to UFCW spokesman Bruce Kozarsky, the targets include
Food Lion Inc., a supermarket chain in the southeastern United States
owned by the Belgian company Delhaize; the Furrs supermarket chain,
based in Albuquerque, N.M., and owned by the German company Leibbrand;
and the Swedish retailer Ikea, which is expanding in the United States
and Europe.
   Attending the conference were union leaders from Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, West
Germany, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Poland,
Singapore, South Africa, Sweden, the United States and Zimbabwe.


------

Refunding opens, yields fall on 3-year notes
By VINCENT DEL GIUDICE
UPI Business Writer

				    -34-


   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Yields fell on 3-year Treasury notes Tuesday to
an average of 8.10 percent, the lowest level since November, at the
start of the government's three-day quarterly refunding.
   The Treasury Department auctioned $11.53 billion of the 8 percent
interest rate notes at an average of $99.738 with 100 equaling the face
value and one point representing $10 on each $1,000 investment.
   At the last quarterly refunding, May 8, the average yield on 3-year
Treasury notes was 8.74 percent. Tuesday's 8.10 yield was the lowest
yield on a 3-year offering since 7.77 percent Nov. 9, 1989, the Treasury
Department said.
   Cash raised through the quarterly refunding allows the government
to settle its debts, including other securities reaching maturity.
   Against a backdrop of a new Mideast crisis and a weakening domestic
economy, the government accepted about one out of every three bids for
the notes, which are backed by the full faith and credit of the United
States.
   In times of doubt, many investors prefer short-term securities,
such as the three-year notes.
   The quarterly refunding will continue Wednesday with an auction of
10-year notes totaling $10.5 billion.
   On Thursday, the Treasury Department will auction 30-year bonds
totaling $10.25 billion as well as 36-day cash management bills Thursday
totaling $10 billion.
   All the issues offered through the refunding will settle Aug. 15.
   There was doubt last week as to whether the refunding would go on
as planned because Congress had yet to increase the debt limit. But
lawakers passed a short-term bill granting $72 billion in additional
borrowing authority through Oct. 2 to keep the government running.
   Robert Glauber, the under secretary of the Treasury for finance,
had said the quarterly refunding would be delayed if the House and
Senate failed to pass the legislation increasing the debt limit.

------

Consumer credit up only $463 million in June
By VINCENT DEL GIUDICE
UPI Business Writer

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Consumer borrowing slowed in June, increasing
only $463 million at an annual growth rate of 0.8 percent on fewer auto
loans and credit card charges, the Federal Reserve Board said Tuesday.
   Private economists expected an increase of $2.5 billion in credit.
   In May, consumer credit surged $3.65 billion, at an annual growth
rate of 6.1 percent, after an increase of $390 million in April, at an
annual growth rate of 0.6 percent.
   ``Outstanding auto loans declined while growth in revolving credit
slowed'' in June, the Federal Reserve said in its monthly report.
``Other credit outstanding rose and mobile home loans fell.''
   Specifically, automobile loans fell $1.6 billion in June after
dipping $5 million in May, while mobile home loans dropped $85 million

				    -35-

in June after gaining $113 million in May.
   Revolving credit increased $1.3 billion in June after gaining
nearly $3.2 billion in May and fueling most of that month's gain.
   Consumers made fewer charges in Junes on credit cards issued by
banks, but increased the usage of cards issued by retail stores and
gasoline companies, the report said.
   In the category of other credit, charges increased $827 million in
June after rising $353 million in May.
   The Federal Reserve also said that auto finance companies charged
12.58 percent interest on new car loans in June, up from 12.23 percent
in May. The finance companies also charged 16 percent interest on used
cars in June, down from 16.03 percent in May.
   No data was available for terms of credit offered by banks in June,
but in May the report said banks charged 11.82 percent interest on
48-month new car loans, 15.41 percent on 24-month personal loans, and
14.09 percent interest on mobile home loans.
   Bank credit cards in May averaged 18.14 percent, the Federal
Reserve said.

------

Market Report

   Dow Jones closing stock averages.
30 Indus  2710.64 off  5.70
20 Trans   964.78 off 15.51
15 Utils   204.41 off  0.51
65 Stocks  946.07 off  5.63

   AMEX Most Active Stocks Close.
KingdomDenmarkWts	  12 7-8 off   1-2
SalomonIncNikkeiPutWts	  12	 off   5-8
Amdahl			  12 1-2 up    7-8
A/S EksportfinansPutWts'93 4 1-2 off   1-4
PaineWeberPutWts'93        4 1-2 off   3-8

   New York Stock Exchange Indexes- close.
Composite	183.45 up  0.13
Industrial	228.87 unchanged
Transport	150.51 off 0.82
Utility 	 86.99 up  0.14
Finance 	130.29 up  0.65
   Equivalent to a gain of 3 cents in the average price of a N.Y.S.E.
common share.
   Volume 231,580,000 shares.

   NYSE Most Active Stocks
Texaco		     64 3-4 off   1-4
AlcanAluminum	     22 1-2 unch
GE		     67     up	1
PhillipMorrisHold'g  45     up  1

				    -36-

Walmart 	     28 5-8 unch
BoeingCo	     51 1-2 up	1
GM		     40 1-8 off 1 3-8
ATT		     35 3-8 up	1
IBM		    103     off   7-8
Exxon		     53 3-8 off 1 1-8

NYSE advances	     736
declines	     837
unchanged	     445

AMEX volume   19,316,000
advances	     257
declines	     341
unchanged	     247

NYSE Comp  183.45 up   0.13
NYSE Inds  228.87 unch
AM Index   339.84 off  0.43

   Standard and Poor's hourly stock indexes (1982 average equals 100
for transportation, all others 1941-43 equals 10):
400 Ind   20 Trns  40 Util   40 Fncl 500 Stocks
Previous     394.74    245.98	134.82	   25.15    334.43
Opening      397.55    248.21	135.63	   25.50    336.95
11 a.m.      397.07    247.70	134.98	   25.46    336.38
Noon	     394.78    245.66	134.69	   25.37    334.63
1 p.m.	     393.97    244.36	134.56	   25.34    333.99
2 p.m.	     394.17    244.41	134.35	   25.35    334.07
3 p.m.	     394.00    245.34	134.26	   25.34    333.95
Close	     395.10    245.61	134.47	   25.43    334.83
Change	    up 0.36   up 0.37 off 0.35	 up 0.28   up 0.40

---------
   The prime lending rate stood at 10 percent.
   The discount rate was seven percent.

Certificates of Deposit: (Average of all major U-S banks)
   30 to 59 days brought 7.93 percent.
   60 to 89 days brought 7.90 percent.
   90 to 119 days brought 7.89 percent.
   120 to 149 days brought 7.88 percent.
   150 to 179 days brought 7.88 percent.
   180 days brought 7.88 percent.

   U-S Treasury Bills: Secondary market discount rate:
   Three months brought 7.38-7.36 percent.
   Six months brought 7.33-7.31 percent.
   One year brought 7.24-7.22 percent.

Telerate Interest Rate Index Tuesday: 7.762 up 0.025.

				    -37-


---------
   NEW YORK (UPI) - Dow Jones closing averages:
Stock  Open    High    Low     Close   Net Chg.
30 Indus 2744.06 2763.86 2676.24 2710.64 off  5.70
20 Trans  989.60  999.45  954.56  964.78 off 15.51
15 Utils  205.23  206.99  202.28  204.41 off  0.51
65 Stock  959.85  967.72  934.95  946.07 off  5.63
   Transactions in stocks used in averages:
     Tuesday	  Monday
Indus	 42,831,000   35,238,800
Trans	  4,984,800    5,660,800
Utils	  4,437,400    3,158,300
65 Stock 52,253,200   44,057,900
---
Bonds	      Close  Net Chg.
20 Bonds	 91.25 off 0.05
10 Public Utils  92.31	up 0.06
10 Industrials	 90.19 off 0.17
---
   Dow Jones commodity futures index (Dec. 31, 1974 average equals
100) closed at 132.54 up 0.08.


------

MARKETS AT A GLANCE
By United Press International

   NYSE Stocks - Lower in active trading.
   Bonds - Mostly lower.
   American Stocks - Lower in active trading.
   London Stocks - Closed higher in moderate trading.
   Tokyo Stocks - Closed sharply lower in light trading.
   Dollar - Slightly lower against key foreign currencies.
   Gold Futures - Lower.
   Cotton - Slightly higher.
   Chicago Grain Futures - Corn closed off  1/4 to up 3, soybeans up 1 to
   down 2  1/2, wheat off 1 to up  1/2 and oats up  1/2 to  3/4.
   Cattle Trade - Steady; top $76.00.


------

COMMODITY FUTURES AT A GLANCE
By United Press International

   Cocoa - $2 to $4 a ton higher for a 10 metric ton contract.
   Coffee - 0.05 cent to 1.05 cent a pound higher for a 37,500-pound
contract.
   Copper - 0.10 to 0.95 cent a pound higher for a 25,000-pound

				    -38-

contract.
   Cotton - 0.38 cent higher to 0.35 cent a pound lower for a
50,000-pound contract.
   Gold - On the Comex $0.10 higher to $0.70 an ounce lower for a
100-troy-ounce contract.
   Platinum - $8.10 to $8.30 an ounce lower for a 50-troy-ounce
contract.
   Orange Juice - 0.25 cent higher to 0.30 cent a pound lower for a
15,000-pound contract.
   Silver - On the Comex 3.2 to 3.5 cents an ounce lower for a
5,000-troy-ounce contract.
   World Sugar - 0.008 to 0.013 cent a pound higher for a
112,000-pound contract.


------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

People in the News

   JACKSON COLLAPSES: An ailing Janet Jackson had to walk off the
stage Sunday night in St. Louis after only three songs. Even at the
outset Jackson didn't look well, holding her head, clutching her stomach
and appearing out of breath during the 15 minutes she was onstage. She
managed to get backstage before collapsing and then was taken to the
Barnes Hospital emergency room for tests. The hospital wouldn't comment
on her illness but a Jackson spokeswoman said the singer had been on the
road for several months and was exhausted. The 13,000 people in the
audience will get refunds for the $22 tickets and promoters hope to
reschedule Jackson at some point. There was no immediate word on what
would become of the rest of the dates on her Rhythm Nation tour, which
is scheduled to run through Sept. 4.

   ARNOLD VS. PAPARAZZI: Roseanne Barr`s husband, Tom Arnold, is
shaping up as the Sean Penn of the `90s when it comes to paparazzi.
Arnold is accused of pushing and punching his way past three
photographers who had gathered to await their arrival at Los Angeles
International Airport. After the fracas, the photographers marched down
to the police station and filed a complaint and the city attorney's
office now will decide if there is enough evidence to file misdemeanor
charges against Arnold. A police spokesman said the photographers were
believed to be free-lancers and there was no word on whether they were
injured.

   DID POE SAY NO?: A researcher says Edgar Allan Poe`s reputation as
a drug fiend is undeserved. Christopher Eckard, a ranger and researcher
at the Edgar Allan Poe National Historic Site in Philadelphia, has gone
through the writer's letters and other documents and has found no
mention of the opium and morphine habits usually attributed to Poe.
``The bottom line is that there is no hard evidence to back up any of

				    -39-

Poe's reputation,'' said Eckard, author of the study ``Did Poe Just Say
No?'' Daniel Hoffman, an English professor at the University of
Pennsylvania, questions Eckard's conclusion. ``The absence of such
mention (in Poe's letters) is not in itself conclusive,'' he said.
``Although one should resist the temptation to identify Poe with the
abusers in his stories, he was interested in altered states of
consciousness,'' Hoffman said. ``He knew enough about drug-induced
trances to know its effect on people.''

   GLIMPSES: Aerosmith has been booked to appear Sept. 8 at the Hard
Rock Cafe opening in Las Vegas and proceeds from the night will go to
the St. Jude's Good Shepherd Campus, a home for abused children. The
appearance comes two days after Aerosmith is to perform at the MTV
Awards in Los Angeles and just before they resume their world tour by
heading to the Far East and Australia ... The late Lucille Ball`s 79th
birthday won't go unmarked at Ellen's Stardust Diner in New York
Tuesday. A Lucy look-alike contest was scheduled with many of the women
who answered to a casting call for a CBS movie about Ball scheduled to
compete and Henny Youngman among the judges.

---------

Cable TV company investigation requested
By THOMAS S. DRAKE

   MADISON, Wis. (UPI) - The national cable televison company, TCI
Cablevision, was accused Monday of violating state consumer protection
laws for providing a free television listing and then asking customers
to pay for the service.
   State Rep. Spencer Black, D-Madison, said TCI, which serves several
markets in the Madison area and has operations in all 50 states,
provided customers with a monthly magazine called ``TV Entertainment''
for free.
   He said customers ``unfairly'' received notice from the company
saying they now would be billed $6 per year for the magazine unless they
wrote back cancelling their previously free subscription. Some of the
notices, Black said, were delivered July 28, eight days after the
deadline for consumers to notify the comany of their intentions.
   ``In order to avoid being charged, they were obliged to respond to
TCI. This appears to amount to false and misleading advertising,'' Black
said.
   Consumers apparently never were told that agreeing to receive the
free magazine could lead to to them being billed for it at a later date,
he said.
   The state Justice Department said it was reviewing Black's request
for an investigation, but provided no additional comment.
   TCI in Madison and in Overland Park, Kans., where it's marketing
divison is headquartered, did not return calls from United Press
International.
   Black recently criticized 1984 deregulation of the cable television
industry. He recently organized a group of 24 state legislators to write

				    -40-

Congress asking the industry again be regulated.


------

Alabama professor named to shuttle crew

   (BIRMINGHAM, Alabama) - A University of Alabama-Birmingham
professor could be one of the members of a 1992 space shuttle crew.
   NASA yesterday announced that U-A-B optometry professor Larry
DeLucas was one of four scientists selected to serve as payload
specialists for a Spacelab mission in March of 1992. After completing
nine months of training, two of the researchers will be selected to fly
on the mission and the other two will serve as backups.
   DeLucas, who is associate director of U-A-B's Center for
Macromolecular Crystallography, says he has wanted to be an astronaut
since he was in high school. The 40-year-old scientists has been sending
up protein crystal growth experiments on shuttle missions since 1985...
but he says flying on the shuttle would allow him to perform more
experiments and make changes during the flight.
   DeLucas and other researchers have been conducting experiments on
growing crystals in the weightlessness of space with hopes of designing
new drugs to fight AIDS and other diseases.


------

Automatic dialers to be investigated

   (RALEIGH, North Carolina) - The State Attorney General's office is
investigating those pesky automatic dialers used by telemarketers. The
devices randomly dial telephone numbers and sometimes give listeners an
UNwanted recorded commerical message.
   The computer generated calls, however, are NOT just a pain in the
ear. State officials say some messages urge people to call 900 numbers
without making it clear it is NOT a free call. Some 900 number calls
cost up to 50-dollars.
   Special Deputy Attorney General Jo Ann Sanford says in some cases
the calls are just a scam.
   Use of the computer calling machines is against the law in North
Carolina. But some calls come from across state lines. A federal
proposal will soon stop that practice.

------

Tandy unveils 6-pound computer

   DALLAS (UPI) - A notebook-sized computer that weighs just 6 pounds
was  introduced Monday by Tandy Corp., which plans to begin sales of the
new computer in its nationwide chain of Radio Shack stores next month.
   The 1500 HD is Tandy's smallest computer developed to date and will

				    -41-

have a retail price of $1,999.
   Tandy's major competitors in the small computer market are Toshiba
and Houston-based Compaq Computer Corp., said JoeAnn Stahel, president
of the Dallas-based StoreBoard market research firm.
   ``The new machine is on a par with what Compaq and Toshiba are
offering,'' Stahel said. ``It has a good feel, and it gives you a lot of
functionality in a small package.''
   ``The issue facing Tandy is the same one facing everybody,'' Stahel
said. ``They have to work on convincing people that they need a
lightweight laptop computer.''
   Tandy spokeswoman Fran McGehee said the company plans to market the
computer to both home and business users.

------

NASA subcontractor pleads guilty to fraud charges

   HOUSTON (UPI) - The Department of Justice said Monday a NASA
subcontractor has has pled guilty to one criminal count of submitting a
false statement to the United States government.
   ILC Dover Inc. has agreed to pay the Department of Justice nearly
$1.2 million to settle civil fraud allegations that the firm defrauded
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration by mischarging labor
hours to NASA contracts and overcharging costs on other NASA
subcontracts.
   ILC has also agreed to pay a $10,000 fine, officials said.
   An investigation revealed that top management officials at ILC's
Space Systems Division in Houston personally directed ILC employees to
falsify their labor timesheets.
   ILC employees also were instructed to mischarge work to NASA
cost-reimbursable contracts when the employees had been working on ILC's
commercial contracts or on other NASA cost-reimbursible contracts.
   ILC also submitted fraudulent labor cost data to NASA and received
inflated cost reimbursements.
   The criminal plea and civil fraud settlement resulted from a joint
investigation conducted by NASA and the FBI.

------

NASA managers rule out shuttle test
By WILLIAM HARWOOD
UPI Science Writer

   CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (UPI) - NASA managers have canceled a planned
fueling test for the shuttle Columbia, allowing the repaired spaceship's
launch to move up four or five days to around the first of September,
officials said Tuesday.
   Sources who requested anonymity said several top agency officials
argued against the decision, but apparently were overruled. William
Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for spaceflight, planned to
discuss the agency's launch plans at an afternoon news conference in

				    -42-

Washington.
   In the meantime, engineers at the Kennedy Space Center are gearing
up to haul Columbia to launch pad 39A early Friday for final
preparations before liftoff around the first of the month on a
long-delayed astronomy mission.
   Equipped with a new fuel line fitting to replace one that leaked
explosive hydrogen in May, Columbia had been scheduled for a fueling
test Aug. 23 to make sure the leak has been eliminated once and for all.
   But officials said Tuesday NASA managers had decided to eliminate
the test to save time. Instead, sensors will be used to search for any
leaking hydrogen as the shuttle is fueled for launch.
   ``We're actually going to do a tanking test,'' said one agency
official who asked not to be identified. ``It just happens to be the day
(before) launch. We're still going to have sensors there and if they
pick up anything and we go out of specification, we'll stop.''
   Engineers said the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
had little to gain from another fueling test because regardless of when
another leak might be detected - during a fueling test or the night
before launch - Columbia would have to be hauled back to its hangar for
repairs.
   And that would prevent any chance of launching the ship before the
shuttle Discovery's high-priority flight Oct. 5 to carry the
European-built Ulysses solar probe into orbit.
   Given that Columbia is equipped with a new fuel line fitting and
that engineers have no reason to suspect additional problems, many NASA
managers believe the agency has nothing to gain by conducting another
fueling test.
   A launch around Sept. 1 would be scheduled for around 1:17 a.m.
   At the controls will be commander Vance Brand, 59, and co-pilot Guy
Gardner, 42. Their crewmates are John ``Mike'' Lounge, 43, Robert
Parker, 53, Jeffrey Hoffman, 45, and civilian astronomers Ronald Parise,
39, and Samuel Durrance, 46.
   The goal of the 10-day mission is to study the high-energy
ultraviolet light emitted by stars, galaxies and other deep space
objects, radiation that cannot penetrate Earth's atmosphere.
   The astronauts originally were set for launch May 30, but during
fuel loading the night before, hydrogen gas was detected spewing into
Columbia's engine compartment.
   Subsequent tests traced the potentially dangerous leak to seals
inside the ship's 17-inch-wide hydrogen ``disconnect'' fitting where
fuel lines from the external tank enter the belly of the orbiter. The
disconnect assembly allows the external tank to be jettisoned in space.
   Columbia's disconnect fitting was replaced by one built for the new
shuttle, Endeavour, presumably fixing the problem.
   While that work was going on, NASA proceeded with plans to launch
Atlantis on a four-day military mission, but the mid-July flight was put
on hold when a leak showed up in a joint where the ship's 17-inch-wide
hydrogen line bolts to its disconnect assembly.
   The problem, unrelated to the leak that grounded Columbia, could
not be fixed at the launch pad, and Atlantis will be hauled back to the
Vehicle Assembly Building Thursday to make room for Columbia on pad 39A.

				    -43-

   Discovery is scheduled to follow Columbia into space, with liftoff
from pad 39B planned for Oct. 5. If all goes well, Atlantis will finally
get off on its secret military mission in early November.ASA's launch
schedule is built around the Discovery mission. In order to fly over the
poles of the sun, Ulysses must first be fired to Jupiter so it can use
the giant planet's gravity for a slingshot boost down and out of the
plane of the solar system, back toward the sun.
   Because of the positions of Earth and Jupiter, Ulysses must be
launched during October or the flight will be delayed 13 months to allow
the planets to return to a good launch position.

------

Report places collider cost at $9.7 billion

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - The latest study on the superconducting super
collider reportedly indicates the giant atom smasher may cost as much as
$9.7 billion to build, the highest figure yet announced.
   A report published by the Washington newsletter Inside Energy said
a U.S. Department of Energy auditing team has placed the collider's cost
at least $1 billion higher than three other estimates made recently by
DOE experts and scientists.
   Energy Secretary James Watkins is expected to present a final cost
estimate to Congress next week.
   DOE spokesman Jeff Sherwood told the Dallas Times Herald that
Energy Undersecretary Henson Moore has indicated the latest study
generally agrees with the other three on the basic cost of building the
collider, but differs on how much money is needed to cover
contingencies.
   Such contingencies could include delays caused by breaks in
congressional funding or technological problems in developing key parts
of the collider, which is set to be built around Waxahachie, Texas,
south of Dallas.
   Sherwood said he could not comment further on the unfinished study
being done by the department's Independent Cost Estimating group, which
includes DOE experts and outside contractors not connected with the
collider project.
   Another group not directly involved with the SSC, the High Energy
Physics Advisory Panel, placed the collider's cost at $8.6 billion.
   The SSC Laboratory in DeSoto and DOE's Office of Energy Research,
both responsible for collider construction and research, adopted
estimates of $7.8 billion and $8.3 billion, respectively.
   Moore said last week that the department is inclined to accept the
SSC Lab figure.
   ``The credibility of the Energy Department is at stake in this
entire cost process,'' Rep. Dennis Eckart, D-Ohio, told the
Times-Herald. ``Given the vagary of the numbers and the unfortunate
upward trend line, they're going to have some explaining to do to the
appropriations committee.''
   Randy Erben, head of the State of Texas' office in Washington,
D.C., said the ICE report apparently will not be ``helpful

				    -44-

politically,'' but noted that the four estimates seem to differ only on
the contingency costs.


------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

The Rest Of the News.....

Cow goes on rampage
   GAINESVILLE, Fla. (UPI) - A runaway cow was back behind a fence
after escaping from a livestock yard, ramming cars, chasing would-be
cowboys and generally raising a ruckus during what turned out to be a
roadside rodeo.
   The black, 1,000-pound cow escaped from the Gainesville Livestock
Mariet late Saturday afternoon and took off down a heavily traveled
road. Oddly enough, the first people to confront it were a former Texas
cowboy and a man who had gone to the store to buy some steaks.
   About a half-dozen people tried to move in on the mobile moo-cow,
but it kept butting into cars and swerving out of the way as passers-by
pointed and hollered at the sight.
   Three cars were damaged before the cow loped into some nearby woods
and was cornered.
   Police Officer Dan Mesa and a couple of bystanders tried to coral
the beast until help could arrive. But the cow charged anyone who
approached.
   Mesa was nearly hit three times. And Larry Edwards, whose car was
rammed twice by the cow, said he would have bought the farm himself
except that the cow's charge was blocked by a tree.
   ``If it weren't for that tree, he would have got me for sure,''
Edwards said before being told the cow was a she.
   A posse of cowboys from the livestock market arrived with a
tranquilizer gun after about two hours. They hit the battling bovine
with the first shot, but that sent her running across some yards and
right by a McDonald's before it finally collapsed.
   ``He's down,'' a winded man, also apparently confused as to the
cow's gender, was heard saying over the police-band radio two hours and
40 minutes after bossy's escape. ``The bull is down.''
   Of course, that presented another problem: how to load a half-ton
package of doped-up beef into a trailer. But then that's why they make
electric cattle pods.
   With cowboys prodding and pulling at the cow with ropes, the animal
struggled to its feet, collapsing several times before lurching into a
trailer and collapsing one last time.
   Scott Coleman, one of the would-be cowpokes, was left with two
3-inch-deep dents in the door and fender of his pickup truck, testiments
to the cow's audacity.
   ``They've got hard heads,'' Coleman said. ``And they don't make
cars like they used to.''


				    -45-

---------
Man wants political party in his own name
   SPRINGFIELD, Ill. (UPI) - Wham! Bang! Jim Wham is in the race.
   The Republican attorney from Centralia wants to run for Congress
and he took the first step Monday by filing petitions with the Illinois
State Board of Elections to form his own party, with the name of the Jim
Wham Party.
   Wham, 71, turned in petitions containing what he said were more
than 12,000 signatures in an effort to run for the U.S. House against
Democratic Rep. Glenn Poshard of Carterville. Poshard had been running
unopposed.
   Wham's platform is based on his disapproval of Poshard's vote
against a proposed constitutional amendment to ban flag burning. Wham
said Poshard's vote on the issue took place after the deadline to run as
an established candidate so he had to form his own party, his only
vehicle to get on the ballot.
   ``He's not going to get a free ride with a vote like that,'' Wham
said.
   Wham, who has been a delegate to four Republican national
conventions, needs at least 11,385 valid signatures to get his name and
party on the ballot. Opponents have until the end of the week to file
objections and try to get some of Wham's signatures disqualified.

---------
   (ASHEVILLE, North Carolina) - First it was a Jesse Helms' watch
that kept time by running backwards. Now its Jesse Helms toilet paper.
   Now consumers can buy a roll of toilet paper featuring politcal
cartoons lambasting the Republican Senator from North Carolina.
   The latest Helms item is the brainchild of James Warlick of
Asheville... a businessman who sells campaign buttons and other
political paraphernalia.
   Warlick says the idea for Helms toilet paper hit him about the time
the controversy began over government funding of allegedly obscene art.
   Warlick says... quote... ``Why NOT a piece of real obscene art?''
   The toilet paper went on sale last week in Warlick's store on
Washington's Union Station... and he says it's been a real hit.
   A member of Helms' staff bought a roll for the senator.
   Warlick says he hopes the arch-conservative takes the new item as
humorous. He says Helms took the watch in good stride six years ago.
   The watch had a carricature of the senator, and it measured time by
running backwards.
---------

				    -46-

